[Facts] this appeal by special leave has been preferred by tata consultancy engineers against an award dated 20th december 1978 of the industrial tribunal maharashtra bombay revising the wage scales of certain categories of employees and granting various other benefits. tata consultant engineers at its inception was a partnership firm but subsequently the partnership was dissolved and in 1974 the undertaking became one of the divisions of tata sons limited. it functions as a consulting organisation and a service industry and does not manufacture any product or carry on trade. its work force consists of engineers and supervisors and different categories of workmen. out of 665 employees at bombay the draftsmen and the administrative staff number 306 these workmen are members of the tata consultant employees union. they served a charter of demands in july 1974 on the appellant and as their demands were not accepted and conciliation proceedings proved fruitless the state government made a reference of the dispute under s 10 1   d  industrial tribunal maharashtra for adjudication. the reference was numbered i t no 292 of 1975. the union filed a statement before the tribunal claiming an upward revision of the wage scales and dearness allowance and an increase from fifteen years to twenty years in the span for earning annual increments. it was urged that the efficiency bar as a feature of the wage scales should be removed. the dearness allowance it was claimed should be granted on a slab system. the claim of the union was resisted by the appellant who maintained that the existing wage scales were fair and reasonable on a region cum industry basis and that it would not be possible for the appellant to bear the additional financial burden if the demands of the union were accepted. reference was made to the political uncertainty in iran which had placed an appreciable part of the appellant s business in jeopardy and to various other factors peculiar to an engineering consultancy business beyond the appellant s control. there was fierce competition also it was asserted from other similar organisations. the appellant had introduced various pay scales in 1973 and some time later they were revised. there was no separate dearness allowance until january 1977 when it was introduced for the first time. house rent allowance was also paid. dearness allowance became payable at 10  of the basic wage subject to a minimum of rs 50  and house rent allowance at 30  of the basic salary. nothing those facts the tribunal observed that compared with the increased paying capacity of the appellant an inference drawn from the prosperity enjoyed by the appellant over the years there was definite need for revising the wage scales. it was pointed out that the dearness allowance and house rent allowance granted by the appellant made little impact in neutralising the cost of living. the need for revising the wage scales was not disputed by the appellant. in proceeding to revise the wage structure the tribunal took into account the two principles involved in the process the financial capacity of the industry to bear the burden of an increased wage bill and the prevailing wage structure on an industry cum region basis. wage scale statements were filed by the parties before the tribunal pertaining to several engineering consultancy organisations but. in the absence of pertinent information concerning the strength of their labour force the extent of their business the financial position for some years the capital invested the precise nature of the business the position regarding reserves dividends declared and future prospects of the company the tribunal found that it was unable to rely on them as comparable concerns. holding it impossible in the circumstances to apply the principle of industry cum region basis the tribunal turned to a consideration of the financial capacity of the company to bear an additional burden in this connection it proceeded on the footing that the appellant was a separate and independent division of tata sons limited and had no  functional integrality  with the other divisions. having regard to the net profits earned by the appellant from 1968 to 1977 it found that the acceptance of the demands of the union would result in an increased burden of rs 7 crores a burden which would dry up the appellant s resources and would be impossible for it to bear. the union modified its demands but even the modified terms according to the tribunal appeared to be on the high side inasmuch as the resulting total burden of rs 1 70 crores was much higher than the average profits could sustain. the particular character of the appellant that it was a service industry and not a manufacturing concern was taken into account and it was observed that unlike a manufacturing business there was little scope for diversification in the case of an engineering consultancy. nonetheless the tribunal observed there was every reason to expect that the appellant would be able to earn sound profits in the future and the instability in its business activities occasioned by the turbulent political situation in iran would be it was expected compensated by contracts secured in different developing countries. for the purpose of determining the financial capacity of the appellant the tribunal followed unichem laboratories v. their workmen 1972 indlaw sc 18 1  where it was held that the gross profits should be computed without making deductions on account of taxation development rebate and depreciation. it decided also that there was no ground for deducting the notional value of gratuity. revising the figures on that basis it computed the annual gross profits for the years 1968 to 1977 and determined the annual average at rs 26 69 lakhs. the tribunal took note of the elaborate scales of wages already existing in the wage structure of the appellant and decided  to modify the existing structure of the scales with flat increases in each category. it also observed that the category of draughtsmen needed a special increase. but it rejected the demand of the union for dearness allowance on the basis of a slab system because that would have imposed an unacceptable burden on the appellant s financial capacity and there was no reason why the existing scheme of dearness allowance should be disturbed when a substantial increase was being made in the level of the basic wage. taking into account the circumstance that besides the staff of 306 workmen represented by the union there were several other employees who would also have to be paid the tribunal considered it fair in paragraph 23 of the award to give a flat increase of rs 150  in the category of draughtsmen and rs 100  in the case of other categories. it rejected the demand of the union for abolishing the efficiency bar but the span of 15 years for earning increment was expanded in some grades to 20 years and some adjustments were also made in specific grades. the tribunal also noted that after the salaries of the employees had been fixed in the respective scales senior employees would have to be given some more increments in the new scales according to their completed years of service. taking all these factors into consideration it made an award dated 20th december 1978 prescribing the following revision in the existing scales of wages. the tribunal maintained the existing schemes of dearness allowance and house rent allowance and observed that in view of the revised basic wages there would be a resultant increase in the dearness allowance and house rent allowance. the revised wage scales the tribunal directed should take effect retrospectively from 1st january 1976 it also laid down the principle enabling the actual fitment of the workmen in their respective wage scales as on that date and also provided for the number of increments to which they would be entitled having regard to the period of completed service. two days after the award was made an application was made by the union stating   in the said award your honour has observed at the end of para 22  in view of the increase that is being allowed in the basic pay i do not propose to revise the existing scheme of dearness allowance. further it appears that the tribunal intended to grant the increase of rs 150  to each draughtsman and rs 100  to all other workmen in their basic pay. the union prayed that the position may be clarified and the award corrected accordingly. on the same date the tribunal disposed of the application by the following order   there can be no doubt that a flat increase of rs 150  to each of the employees in the category of draftsmen and of rs 100  to each employee in the other categories has been granted under my award. sd  k n wani industrial tribunal. the workmen have filed an appeal by special leave civil appeal no 2300 of 1979 in which they have challenged the rejection by the tribunal of their claim in respect of dearness allowance which they contend should be pegged to the cost of living index and should not be a fixed amount. in its order of 22nd. december 1978 the tribunal has referred to the statement  exhibit c 51  filed by the appellant when called upon to indicate the increased financial burden apprehended by it. the tribunal has relied on this statement as evidence showing that the appellant knew that a flat increase of rs 150  and rs 100  was intended to each of the employees in the category of draughtsmen and the other categories. in so construing the statement exhibit c 51 the tribunal has grievously erred. the tribunal in the present case considered the matter and found it sufficient and in accord with justice that the wage scales should be restructured with suitable increments provided therein. it noted that dearness allowance was being granted by the appellant at 10  of the salary subject to a minimum of rs 50  and house rent allowance at 30  of the basic salary. having regard to the not inconsiderable improvement in the level of the basic wage it observed that there would be a consequent increase in the dearness allowance and house rent allowance. in view of the increase so secured the tribunal rejected the suggestion that a slab system should be introduced in the dearness allowance or that there should be any other modification of the principle on which dearness allowance was being presently granted. it declared that the cumulative effect of an improved wage structure together with dearness allowance operating on a slab system would throw an impossible burden of about rs 1 crore on the financial capacity of the appellant. in the present case the industrial tribunal on a consideration of the material placed before it came to the conclusion that the company was in an undoubted position to bear the additional financial burden. at the end of paragraph 15 of the award the tribunal stated   but there can be no doubt that the company can very well bear the additional burden. the question is what should be the extent of such burden. at the end of paragraph 18 of the award the tribunal said  a  mere reading of exhibit u 15 will immediately dispel the misgivings about the future of the present company. for some years to come this is likely to be one of the few consulting engineers who will be securing major contracts. again in paragraph 19 it was said   i have no doubt that the present company would be able to bear the additional burden for the years to come. this is further borne out from the trading results of the company for the year 1968 69 to 1977 the profits have increased all along. the copy of the letter dated july 23 1973 alongwith. the annexures from the company to the director general posts   telegraphs delhi  ex c 27  indicates the important projects the company was handling in india and abroad and the amount of foreign exchange earned and repatriated. i will  therefore proceed on the ground that the present company can bear the additional financial burden  finally at the end of paragraph 21. the tribunal said   in view of this position the company can easily bear some burden that might fall as a result of the upward revision of the wage scales. the question is to what extent the relief should be given to the employees. after expressing himself in categoric terms about the capacity of the company to bear the additional financial burden the tribunal went on to say   i only propose to modify the existing structure of the scales with flat increases in each category  the tribunal then considered the question whether draftsmen should get a higher flat increase and the question whether the existing scheme of dearness allowance should be revised. the tribunal then observed         the flat increase of rs 150  in the category of draftsmen and rs 100  in the case of the other categories would be fair  thereafter various other matters were considered and finally the tribunal revised the wage scales in the manner already mentioned by my brother pathak j the question of  fitment  was then considered in the following manner    fitment   if as on 1st january 1976 an employee is drawing a salary less than the beginning of the respective grade he should be first stepped up to the beginning of the grade. if the pay of an employee does not coincide with any step in the revised pay scale and falls between two steps in the reclassified pay scales the basic pay of that employee shall be fixed at the step higher in the revised scale. after fixing the salary of the employees in the scales as above the employees should be given increments in the new scales as noted below    i  employees who have completed 5 years or more as on 1st january 1976 3 increments. ii  employees who have completed 4 years of service as on 1st january 1976 2 increments. iii. all other employees with more than one year s service shall be given one increment.
[Ratio of the decision] however this is not clearly mentioned anywhere in the award due to accidental slip or omission. we have been taken through some of the material on the record in the attempt to support the contention but after giving careful thought to the matter i think there is ample justification for what the tribunal did. it must be remembered that although the wage scales were introduced as long ago as 1973 they were maintained at that level except for a slight revision some time thereafter. no dearness allowance was paid until the beginning of 1977 and the house rent allowance also was introduced about that time. the cost of living had gone on increasing from 1972 onwards and as the tribunal has found the dearness allowance and house rent allowance made no appreciable impact in neutralising the increasing cost. during all these years the appellant had continued to enjoy increasing profits  nonetheless the emoluments received by the workmen did not receive the impress of the appellant s growing prosperity. the charter of demands was presented by the union in july 1974 and when conciliation proceedings failed the state government made the reference to the industrial tribunal in 1975 the tribunal has referred to various considerations which prevailed with it in giving retrospectivity to the revised pay scales. they are considerations which cannot be ignored. accordingly the contention raised on behalf of the appellant against retrospectivity of the wage scales must be rejected. the challenge embodied in the second contention against the amendment of the award is more serious. the jurisdiction given to the tribunal by rule 31 is closely circumscribed. it is only a clerical mistake or error which can be corrected and the clerical mistake or error must arise from an accidental slip or omission in the award. an accidental slip or omission implies that something was intended and contrary to that intention what should not have been included has been included or what should have been included has been omitted. it must be a mistake or error amenable to clerical correction only. it must not be a mistake or error which calls for rectification by modification of the conscious adjudication on the issues involved. is the instant case one where the amendment made by the tribunal in the original award can be said to correct a mere clerical mistake or error arising from an accidental slip or omission. to answer the question it is necessary to examine the basis of the award and the intent which flows from that basis. the terms of reference in the state government s order required the tribunal to revise the scales of pay and dearness allowance and there was no mention of giving any ad hoc increase in the basic pay of individual workman. it would do well to recall that the claim of the union filed before the tribunal also centered on the need to revise the wage scales. that was the main issue between the parties. it is to the task of revising the pay scales that the tribunal addressed itself and throughout the material part of the award it is that task which held its focussed attention. the financial capacity of the appellant and the related study of its annual profits from 1968 to 1977 were examined from that view point. the sufficiency of the existing pay scales was considered in detail and regard was had to their original structure and the accretions made subsequently by way of dearness allowance and house rent allowance. for the purpose of restructuring the pay scales the tribunal ruled on the paying capacity of the appellant both with reference to the profits of the preceding year as well as the prospects of the future. the financial capacity as the tribunal observed constituted one of  the principles which are required to be followed in the fixation of the wage structure. a clear statement of its intention is found in paragraph 22 of the award where the tribunal stated   i only propose to modify the existing structures of the scales with flat increases in each category. no ad hoc increase to the pay of each individual workman was intended. and that is confirmed by what was stated in paragraph 23 of the award   considering this outgoing the flat increase of rs 150  in the category of draughtsman and rs 100  in the case of the other categories would be fair. it will be noted that the pay scales of different categories were being restructured and the flat increase envisaged there related to an increase in the general pay scales of different categories. individual workmen were not present to the mind of the tribunal. that the increase was pertinent to the general pay scales in the revised wage structure is patently clear from a comparison of the existing pay scales and the revised pay scales. the comparative table of existing pay scales and the revised pay scales has been reproduced earlier. the revised pay scales of all categories except the category of draughtsmen shows an increase of rs 100  in the initial pay fixed in each scale the increase in the case of the category of draughtsmen being rs 150   there was only one increase contemplated in the award in paragraph 23 of award and it is more than plain that the increase was the one incorporated in the revised pay scales pertaining to different categories. no second flat increase was envisaged at all. the amendment made by the tribunal has the effect of providing a second increase this time to each individual workmen. if as the tribunal has stated in the amendment order the increase in paragraph 23 was intended to apply to each individual workmen there is nothing in the body of the award to form the foundation on which the actual figures in the restructured pay scales can be made to rest. there will be no explanation why the initial start of the revised pay scales has been increased by rs 150  in the case of the category of draughtsmen and rs 100  in the case of other categories. considering the fitment of the workman in the revised scales it was stated in the award that a workman found drawing a salary less than the beginning of the grade would be stepped up to the beginning of the grade and if his pay fell between two steps in the reclassified pay scales the basic pay was to be fixed at the step higher in the revised scale. conspicuous by its absence is any reference to a flat increase in the pay of an individual workmen. even when considering the range of permissible retrospectivity the tribunal stated in the award   in view of the revision of the wage scales there would be consequent increase in the dearness allowance and the house rent allowance. and the clinching circumstances of all is that the award was made on the basis that the overall financial load according to paragraph 33 of the award would be to the tune of about rs 5 lakhs. it was that figure which the tribunal had in mind against the backdrop of the gross annual figures when it made the revised pay scales retrospective from 1st. january 1976 this liability taken with the liability accruing on the need to increase the salaries of the other staff determined the tribunal s deliberations in regard to the several features of the award including the grant of increments related to completed periods of service the expansion of the span from 15 years to 20 years for earning increments and other benefits. it cannot be the case of the union that the figure of rs 5 lakhs mentioned in paragraph 33 of the award represented the result of adding a flat increase to the pay of each workman in addition to the benefits conferred by the revised pay scales and other awarded reliefs. it seems from a perusal of the document exhibit c 51 that it is a statement giving trial figures of the increased financial load on different bases. on the basis that a sum of rs 150  per month was added to the pay of each draughtsman and a sum of rs 100  was added to the pay of every other workman who belonged to the union staff the financial load would increase to rs 9 22 032   likewise if a flat increase of rs 100  was given to individual workmen of all categories including draughtsmen the increased financial load would total rs 7 64 256   the statement then goes on to indicate that if a flat increase of rs 75  per month were given to individual workmen of all categories the total increase would be rs 5 78 220   again if the flat increase is rs 65  per month to the individual workmen of all categories the additional load would total rs 4 97 772   finally on the basis that the individual draughtsman would be given an increase of rs 75  per month and the individual workmen of other categories rs 50  per month the additional load was calculated at rs 4 63 092   it will be noted that the statement exhibit c 51 was prepared on the basis of the employees  strength as in december 1971 a similar statement was prepared on the basis of the employees  strength as in september 1978 these statements cannot be regarded as evidence that the appellant was cognizant of the intention of the tribunal to provide a flat increase to the pay of each workman. the statement afforded an indication merely of what the additional financial load would be if a flat increase was given to the individual workman on the alternative basis set forth therein. none of the alternatives was actually adopted by the tribunal because when the award was made the tribunal proceeded instead to restructure the wage scales by the addition of rs 150  in the case of the category of draughtsmen and rs 100  in the case of other categories to the initial pay in the wage scales pertaining to those categories. the addition was integrated as a feature of the wage scales  it was not regarded as an addition to the pay of each individual workman. it seems that the tribunal was betrayed by a curious confusion in accepting the plea of the union that a flat increase to the pay of each workman was intended in the original wage and consequently it fell into the error of amending the award. the evidence contained in the award throughout provides incontrovertible proof that this flat increase was never originally intended in the award. the amendment has resulted in the tribunal making as it were a supplementary award whereby a further relief is being granted beyond that granted in the original award. the original award was completed and signed by the tribunal and it cannot be reopened now except for the limited purpose of rule 31 in travelling outside and beyond the terms of the original award the tribunal has committed a jurisdictional error. our attention has been drawn to what purports to be an endorsement by counsel for the appellant on the application dated 22nd december 1978 filed by the union before the tribunal to the effect that the appellant would submit to whatever the tribunal decided and it is urged that the appellant is bound by the order made on the application. it is an accepted principle that consent by a party cannot confer jurisdiction on a court. what is without jurisdiction will remain so. in the circumstances the order of 22nd december 1978 is invalid so far as it amends paragraph 23 of the original award. the corrigendum amending the award in consequence is liable to be quashed. the second contention of the appellant is entitled to succeed. i shall now consider civil appeal no 2300 of 1979 filed by the workmen. it is wrong in principle it is said to provide a fixed dearness allowance. reliance was placed on the hindustan times ltd  new delhi v. their workmen  1964  1 scr 234 1962 indlaw sc 436 247 where it was observed by this court that dearness allowance should not remain fixed at any figure but should be on a sliding scale in order to neutralise a portion of the increase in the cost of living. reference was also made to bengal chemical   pharmaceutical works limited v. its workmen. 2 scr 113 1968 indlaw sc 183 now it is not a universal rule that the dearness allowance should in all cases be correlated with the cost of living index. it was open to the tribunal to adopt the position which it did. if the dearness allowance is linked with the cost of living index the whole award will have to be reopened and the entire basis on which it has been made will have to be reconsidered. the award is a composite document in which the several elements of increased wage scales larger increments longer span of 20 years for earning increments dearness allowance at 10  of the basic wage besides several other benefits have been integrated into a balanced arrangement in keeping with what the tribunal has found to be the financial capacity of the appellant. it is not possible to maintain one part of the award and supersede another. accordingly the appeal filed by the workmen must fail. it is needless to recapitulate all the basic facts which have been set out in the judgment of pathak j the award of the industrial tribunal was made on december 20 1978 on december 22 1978 that is to say two days after the award was made and when everything must have been fresh to the minds of the tribunal the respective parties and their advocates the employees union made an application under rule 31 of the industrial disputes  bombay  rules 1957 seeking a correction of an error which it was claimed had crept into the award. the application was as follows   in the above reference your honour was pleased to pass an award on 20th december 1978. in the said award your honour has observed at the end of para 22  in view of the increase that is being allowed in the basic pay i do not propose to revise the existing scheme of dearness allowance  further it appears that the tribunal intended to grant the increase of rs 150  to each draughtsman and rs 100  to all other workmen in their basic pay. the union therefore prays the honourable tribunal to clarify the position and correct the award accordingly. this order was made in the presence of shri manak gagrat advocate for the company and shri n p mehta advocate for the workmen. the endorsement made on the application by the advocate for the company does not indicate that the company had any objection to the award being corrected as sought by the employees union. on the other hand the endorsement reads as if there was tacit agreement on the part of the company to the correction sought by the union. the order dated december 22 1978 of the tribunal also does not reveal that there was any opposition by the company to the application for correcting the award. even so we propose to examine whether the correction sought by the employees union was within the bounds of the authority of the tribunal or whether it was in effect a fresh award. the primary and basic question considered by the industrial tribunal in making the award dated december 20 1978 was the question of revision of the wage scales. implicit and intrinsically connected with the question of revision of the wage scales were the questions of fitment of employees into the wage scales and flat or ad hoc increase of salaries of workmen wherever considered necessary. it cannot possibly be doubted that an industrial tribunal deciding upon the wage scales of the employees of an establishment would have full liberty to propose ad hoc increase of salaries as part of the revision of wages. nor can it be doubted that fitment into the revised pay scales is certainly a part of the revision of pay scales. this in our opinion is elementary and fundamental to the jurisdiction of the industrial tribunal in revising wage scales. now if without any flat or ad hoc increase of salary the workmen were to be fitted into the revised scales of pay it would obviously result in serious anomalous situations. in the case of several senior employees the revised scale would yield but a very small and almost a token increase in the size of the pay packet whereas the junior employees would get a large benefit. while workmen raising industrial disputes for revision of wage scales are certainly minded about their future prospects in the matter of wages they surely would be more concerned with the immediate benefits according to them. that was why the industrial tribunal thought that an all round flat increase of rs 150  in the case of draftsmen and rs 100  in the case of other workmen was called for. it was clearly so intended by the tribunal as is evident from the reference to  flat increase of rs 150  in the category of draftsmen and rs 100  in the case of the other categories  since there was to be a flat increase of rs 150  and rs 100  in the case of draftsmen and other workmen respectively the revised wage scale had necessarily to commence with figures rs 150  and rs 100  above the existing wage scales. immediately after the award was pronounced while the iron was still hot as it were the employees apparently realised that the employer might take advantage of the circumstance that it was not clearly mentioned in the award that all the employees were to get additional pay of rs 150  and rs 100  respectively and might contend that the tribunal had only revised the wage scales by increasing the salary on entry into the service and restructuring the scale of pay and never granted any ad hoc increase of salary to all employees. therefore they filed an application before the tribunal for correcting the award so as to bring out what was intended. as it has now turned out what the employees apparently suspected the employer might contend is precisely what the employer is not contending though the employer did not choose to so contend before the industrial tribunal itself when the employees filed the application for rectification. the omission of the words to each employee first after the figure rs 150  and again after the figure rs 100  was clearly an accidental slip or omission which the tribunal was entitled to correct. we are unable to see how it can be held to be otherwise. we are not impressed with the submission of the learned counsel for the company that the corrigendum was in effect a fresh award. we therefore see no ground for quashing the order dated december 22 1978 of the tribunal. the result of the foregoing discussion is that civil appeal no 2299 of 1979 has to be dismissed in its entirety. we have already indicated that we agree with our brother pathak j  that the appeal  civil appeal no 2300 of 1979  filed by the workmen should also be dismissed. while we find lot of force in the submission of shri v m tarkunde learned counsel for the workmen that dearness allowance linked to cost of living index is ordinarily the best and the most scientific method of computing dearness allowance it cannot always be said that an illegality warranting interference under article 136 is committed if some other method is adopted. the tribunal has given satisfactory reason for adopting a different mode and we are not disposed to interfere with the award of the tribunal. in the result both the appeals are dismissed without any order as to costs.

[Facts] these two appeals involve identical questions and  therefore  are disposed of by this common judgment after noticing the factual position  so far as they are relevant. the appellants question correctness of the judgment rendered by a division bench of the madras high court which held that the withdrawal of benefits extended to the appellants as subsidy was in order. the appellants questioned legality or the g o ms no  989 dated 1 9 1988 directing discontinuance of purchase tax exemption in case of mills which exceeded the ceiling of rs. 300 lakes during the period of five years  and government letter dated 28 12 1988 which made the aforesaid g o. ms  no  989 of 1 9 1988 operative retrospectively from 1 4 1988. initially the writ petitions were filed before the high court  but after constitution of the tamil nadu taxation special tribunal  hereinafter referred to as the  tribunal   the writ petitions were transferred to the tribunal which held that on application of the principles of promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation  the withdrawal of benefit was not sustainable in law. the state questioned correctness of the judgment before the high court which  as noted above  held the g o ms  and the govt. letter to be valid  reversing the conclusions arrived at by the tribunal. the judgment forms subject matter of challenge in these appeals. in support of the appeals the primary stands raised by the appellants are. the high court erroneously came to hold that the state government had not filed any counter. the materials which were produced before the high court and on the basis of which it is decided that the decision of the government is in order were not even pleaded in the pleadings and during arguments. the appellants were taken by surprise by production of materials which were not even disclosed to the appellants. the contents of the files which were produced before the high court and on which reliance was placed to hold against the appellants are not known to the appellants. in other words  there was clear violation of the principles of natural justice. the government s letter dated 28 12 1988 refers to some decision  but in the absence of any authentication as required under article 166 of the constitution of india  1950  in short the  constitution   the same is ineffective. in any event  the retrospective withdrawal of the benefit on the basis of an executive decision is impermissible. as there was no inducement or assurance  the question of any promissory estoppel did not arise. so far as legitimate expectation aspect is concerned  it is too well known that the benefit extended can be withdrawn and with this knowledge if the units are set up  the principle of legitimate expectation does not apply. the high court recorded the following findings on the factual aspects. the respondents have established their units prior to the government orders granting the subsidy and they have no vested right to claim exemption. no inducement was made in the government orders to establish the units. the respondents have not acted on the basis of the government orders for establishing the units. the grant of subsidy is a concession and the government has got good reasons for modifying the scheme in public interest. no prejudice is caused to the respondents since the scheme was interested to make the units viable and the modified scheme provides for safeguards to that extent. the order granting subsidy can be withdrawn in public interest. the government has exercised their right to modify the scheme in the interest of public revenue. the stand taken by the present appellants before the tribunal and the high court was rejected. with reference to the files produced  certain factual conclusions were arrived at  the correctness of those form the core challenge in these appeals. estoppel is a rule of equity which has gained new dismensions in recent years. a new class of estoppel has come to be recognized by the courts in this country as well as in england. the doctrine of  promissory estoppel  has assumed importance in recent years though it was dimly noticed in some of the earlier cases.
[Ratio of the decision] no vested right as to tax holding is acquired by a person who is granted concession. if any concession has been given it can be withdrawn at any time and no time limit should be insisted upon before it was withdrawn. the rule of promissory estoppel can be invoked only if on the basis of representation made by the government  the industry was established to avail benefit if of exemption. a person may have a  legitimate expectation  of being treated in a certain way by an administrative authority even though he has no legal right in private law to receive such treatment. the expectation may arise either from a representation or promise made by the authority  including an implied representation  or from consistent past practice. the doctrine of legitimate expectation has an important place in the developing law of judicial review. it is  however  not necessary to explore the doctrine in this case  it is enough merely to note that a legitimate expectation can provide a sufficient interest to enable one who cannot point to the existence of a substantive right to obtain the leave of the court to apply for judicial review. it is generally agreed that  legitimate expectation  gives the applicant sufficient locus standi for judicial review and that the doctrine of legitimate expectation to be confined mostly to right to a fair hearing before a decision which results in negativing a promise or withdrawing an undertaking is taken. the doctrine does not give scope to claim relief straightway from the administrative authorities as no crystallized right as such involved. the protection of such legitimate expectation does not require the fulfilment of the expectation where an overriding public interest requires otherwise. in other words  where a person s legitimate expectation in not fulfilled by taking a particular decision then decision maker should justify the denial of such expectation by showing some overriding public interest. see union of india and others. v  hindustan development corporation and others  air  1994. sc 9981993 indlaw sc 1085. while the discretion to change the policy in exercise of the executive power  when not trammelled by any statute or rule is wide enough  what is imperative and implicit in terms of article 14 is that a change in policy must be made fairly and should not give impression that it was so done arbitrarily or by any ulterior criteria. the wide sweep of article 14 and the requirement of every state action qualifying for its validity on this touchstone irrespective of the field of activity of the state is an accepted tenet. the basic requirement of article 14 is fairness in action by the state  and non arbitrariness in essence and substance is the heart beat of fair play. actions are amenable  in the panorama of judicial review only to the extent that the state must act validity for discernible reasons  not whimsically for any ulterior purpose. the meaning and true import and concept of arbitrariness is more easily visualized than precisely defined. a question whether the impugned action is arbitrary or not is to be ultimately answered on the facts and circumstances of a given case. a basic and obvious test to apply in such cases is to see whether there is any discernible principle emerging from the impugned action and if so  does if really satisfy the test of reasonableness. where a particular mode is prescribed for doing an act and there is no impediment in adopting the procedure  the deviation to act in different manner which does not disclose any discernible principle which is reasonable itself small be labelled as arbitrary. every state action must be informed by reason and it follows that an act uninformed by reason is per se arbitrary. this court s observations in g  b  mahajan v  jalgaon municipal council  air  1991  sc 1153 1990 indlaw sc 438 are kept out of lush field of administrative policy except where policy is inconsistent with the express or implied provision of a statute which creates the power to which the policy relates or where a decision made in purported exercise of power is such that a repository of the power acting reasonably and in good faith could not have made it. but there has to be a word of caution. something overwhelming must appear before the court will intervene. that is and ought to be a difficult onus for an applicant to discharge. the courts are not very good at formulating or evaluating policy. sometimes when the courts have intervened on policy grounds the court s view of the range of policies open under the statute or of what is unreasonable policy has not got public acceptance. on the contrary  curial views of policy have been subjected to stringent criticism. as professor wade points out  in administrative law by h w r  wade  6th edition  there is ample room within the legal boundaries for radical differences of opinion in which neither side is unreasonable. the reasonableness in administrative law must  therefore  distinguish between proper course and improper abuse of power. nor is the test court s own standard of reasonableness as it might conceive it in a given situation. the point to note is that the thing is not unreasonable in the legal sense merely because the court thinks it to be unwise. in hindustan development corporation s case1993 indlaw sc 1085  supra   it was observed that decision taken by the authority must be found to be arbitrary  unreasonable and not taken in public interest where the doctrine of legitimate expectation can be applied. if it is a question of policy  even by ways of change of old policy  the courts cannot intervene with the decision. in a given case whether there are such facts and circumstances giving rise to legitimate expectation  would primarily be a question of fact. the present is as we experience it  the past is a present memory and future is a present expectation. for legal purposes  expectation is not same as anticipation. legitimacy of an expectation can be inferred only if it is founded on the sanction of law. as observed in attorney general for new south wale v  quinn   1990  64 australian ljr 327 to strike the exercise of administrative power solely on the ground of avoiding the disappointment of the legitimate expectations of an individual would be to set the courts adrift on a featureless sea of pragmatism. moreover  the negotiation of a legitimate expectation  falling short of a legal right  is too nebulous to form a basis for invalidating the exercise of a power when its exercise otherwise accords with law. if a denial of legitimate expectation in a given case amounts to denial of right guaranteed or is arbitrary  discriminatory  unfair or biased  gross abuse of power of violation of principles of natural justice  the same can be questioned on the well known grounds attracting article 14 but a claim based on mere legitimate expectation without anything more cannot ipso facto give a right to invoke these principles. it can be one of the grounds to consider  but the court must lift the veil and see whether the decision is violative of these principles warranting interference. it depends very much on the facts and the recognised general principles of administrative law applicable to such facts and the concept of legitimate expectation which is the latest recruit to a long list of concepts fashioned by the courts for the review of administrative action must be restricted to the general legal limitations applicable and binding the manner of the future exercise of administrative power in a particular case. it follows that the concept of legitimate expectation is  not the key which unlocks the treasure of natural justice and it ought not to unlock the gates which shuts the court out of review on the merits   particularly  when the elements of speculation and uncertainty are inherent in that very concept. as cautioned in attorney general for new south wale s case the courts should restrain themselves and respect such claims duly to the legal limitations. it is a well meant caution. otherwise  a resourceful litigant having vested interest in contract  licences  etc  can successfully indulge in getting welfare activities mandated by directing principles thwarted to further his own interest. the caution  particularly in the changing scenario becomes all the more important. if the state acts within the bounds of reasonableness  it would be legitimate to take into consideration the national priorities and adopt trade policies. as noted above  the ultimate test is whether on the touchstone of reasonableness the policy decision comes out unscathed. reasonableness of restriction is to be determined in an objective manner and from the standpoint of interest of the general public and not from the standpoint of the interests of persons upon whom the restrictions have been imposed or upon abstract consideration. a restriction cannot be said to be unreasonable merely because in a given case  it operates harshly. in determining whether there is any unfairness involved the nature of the right alleged to have taken infringed  the underlying purpose of the restriction imposed  the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be remedied thereby  the disproportion of the imposition  the prevailing condition at the relevant time enter into judicial verdict  the reasonableness of the legitimate expectation has to be determined with respect to the circumstances relating to the trade or business in question. canalisation of a particular business in favour of even a specified individual is reasonable where the interests of the country are concerned or where the business affects the economy of the country. see parbhani transport co operative society ltd  v  regional transport authority  aurangabad and others  air  1960. sc 9011960 indlaw sc 472  shree meenakshi mills ltd  v  union of india  air  1974. sc 3651973 indlaw sc 291  hari chand sarda v  mizo district council and another  air  1967  sc 829 1966 indlaw sc 125  krishnan kakkanth v  government of kerala and others  air  1997. sc 128 1996 indlaw sc 1845 and union of india and another v  international trading co  and another   2003  5 scc 437 2003 indlaw sc 472. clause  1  requires that all executive action of the state government shall have to be taken in the name of the governor. further  is no particular formula of words required for compliance with article 166 1. what the court has to see is whether the substance of its requirement has been complied with. a constitution bench in r  chitralekha etc. v  state of mysore and ors. air  1964. sc 1823 1964 indlaw sc 103 held that the provisions of the article were only directory and not mandatory in character and if they were not complied with it could still be established as a question of fact that the impugned order was issued in fact by the state government or the governor. clause  1  does not prescribe how an executive action of the government is to be performed  it only prescribes the mode under which such act is to be expressed. while clause  1  is in relation to the mode of expression  clause  2  lays down the ways in which the order is to be authenticated. whether there is any government order in terms of article 166  has to be adjudicated from the factual background of each case. in order to invoke the doctrine of promissory estoppel clear  sound and positive foundation must be laid in the petition itself by the party invoking and doctrine the bald expressions without any supporting material to the effect that the doctrine is attracted because the party invoking the doctrine has altered its position relying on the assurance of the government would not be sufficient to press into aid the doctrine. the courts are bound to consider all aspects including the results sought to be achieved and the public good at large  because while considering the applicability of the doctrine  the courts have to do equity and the fundamental principles of equity must for ever be present in the mind of the court. in view of the factual position recorded by the high court that at the point of time the appellants  units were set up and the commercial production started there was no assurance or promise. the doctrine of promissory estoppel had no application to the facts of the case at that stage. we find no substance in the plea that before a policy decision is taken to amend or alter the promise indicated in any particular notification  the beneficiary was to be granted an opportunity of hearing. such a plea is clearly unsustainable. while taking policy decision  the government is not required to hear the persons who have been granted the benefit which is sought to be withdrawn. the question of legitimate expectation arises according to the appellants after the benefits were granted by the concerned g o ms. at this juncture we would like to take note to certain factual positions highlighted by the appellants which are practically undisputed by the respondents. contrary to what the high court has stated  it appears from record that counter affidavits were filed. the reasons which have weighed with the high court to uphold the action of the state were not pleaded before the high court specifically  and the high court cull out those from the files which were produced before it. though the appellants were not entitled to any opportunity of hearing before alteration of the benefits flowing from the notifications or withdrawal of any benefit  yet when the state has not taken any specific stand justifying the withdrawal and the high court referred to the files to put its seal of proof  notwithstanding non requirement for granting any opportunity before the withdrawal  principles of natural justice certainly were applicable  since the high court with reference to the files recorded findings on the basis thereof. as noted above no specific grounds or reasons were indicated to justify the withdrawal in the affidavits filed before the tribunal or the high court  as the case may be. as the correctness of factual basis justifying withdrawal is in issue  fair play certainly warranted grant of opportunity to the appellants to present its side of the picture. further  a definite plea was taken that there was no scope for retrospective withdrawal of benefit by an executive order. the high court has not dealt with the issue. the same also needs to be examined. above being the position  decision of the high court by placing reliance on the files to hold that the withdrawal was justified  is not tenable in law and in the fitness of things  the high court should hear the matter afresh and taken decision on those two issues. it is made clear that we have not expressed any opinion on those issues on the facts of the present case. it is to be noted that no privilege was claimed from production of the file as the files were produced before the high court and in fact the high court referred to the materials on the files to affirm state s action. we direct that the state government  if it so chooses  shall file its further counter affidavits before the high court within six weeks from today indicating the reasons which warranted the withdrawal of the benefits extended. the plea of the appellants regarding legitimate expectation shall be considered by the high court in the light of materials to be placed by the respondents by affidavits as directed above. we make it clear that we have not expressed any opinion on the factual aspects except indicating the principles underlying legitimate expectation. another point which was specifically raised before the high court but has not been dealt by it is the legality of the action in directing retrospective withdrawal of the benefit by a letter of the government. whether the same is permissible in law has to be decided by the high court.

[Facts] these appeals are directed against a judgment and order dated 17 october 2003 passed by the special court constituted under the special courts  trial of offences relating to transactions in securities. act  1992  for short  the act   in misc. application nos. 41 of 1999  4 of 2001  265  266 and 275 of 2003. background facts. the appellants herein who are related to one harshad s  mehta  since deceased  purchased nine residential flats in a building called madhuli apartments in worli area of mumbai. the family of the appellants consists of four brothers  their wives  children and their widowed mother. the eldest among them  harshad s  mehta  has since expired. the said nine flats  it is said  were merged and redesigned for joint living of the entire family. the appellants herein and the said. late harshad mehta were persons notified in terms of the act which was enacted to provide for the establishment of a special court for the trial of offences relating to transactions in securities and for matters connected therewith. in terms of the provisions of the act  along with late harshad mehta  the custodian had notified 29 entities in terms of s  3 of the act  comprising three of his younger brothers  wife of late harshad mehta  wives of two of his younger brothers and other corporate entities  a partnership firm and three hufs. however  out of the said 29 entitles  only late harshad mehta and two of his younger brothers were cited as accused in various criminal cases filed against them. the properties of late harshad mehta and the appellants  herein being notified persons stood attached in terms of the provisions of the act. proceedings before the special court. before the learned special court  the parties herein filed several applications which can be sub divided in three categories  as would be noticed shortly hereinafter. it is not in dispute that the learned special court on or about 3 august 1993 issued directions in various proceedings before it appointing auditors to prepare and audit the books of accounts of all notified persons for the period 1 april 1990 and 8 june 1992  i e   the date of the notification. three firms of chartered accountants were appointed to prepare statement of accounts and liabilities of each of the appellants  herein. a chartered accountants  firm was appointed by the learned special judge by an order dated 17 september 2003 to represent all notified entities in the family of late harshad mehta for the purpose of ascertaining their tax liabilities. we may  at this juncture  notice the nature of the applications filed by the parties  herein before the learned special court   i. on 26 april 1999  the custodian filed an application being misc. application no  41 of 1999 seeking permission of the special court for sale of residential premises commonly known as madhuli of eight notified entities. a misc. application being 4 of 2001 was filed by the custodian praying for the sale of commercial premises. the appellants herein filed several misc. applications praying for lifting of attachment on their residential premises on the ground that the same had been purchased much prior to 1 april 1991 and the same had no nexus with any illegal transactions in securities. alternatively  it was prayed that since their asset base was greater than genuine liabilities  the said residential premises should be released from attachment. by reason of the impugned order dated 17 october 2003  the learned special judge allowed misc. applications nos. 4 of 2001 and 41 of 1999. the misc. applications filed by the appellants herein for release of the residential flats as well as the commercial premises from attachment were dismissed. it was directed   in case  all adult members of the family of late shri harshad metha  who are presently occupying the abovereferred flats  file an undertaking in this court within a period of four weeks from today undertaking to vacate the flat occupied by them and hand over peaceful possession thereof to the custodian within a period of four weeks from the date on which the custodian sends them communication asking them to vacate the flats  on sale of the flats being sanctioned by the court. the custodian shall permit the members of family of late shri harshad mehta to occupy the flats during the time that the process of the sale of the flats goes on. in case no such undertakings are filed by the adult members as directed above  within the aforesaid period  the custodian shall stand appointed as receiver of the flats which are described in exh. 8 and exh. 8 1 to misc. petition no  41 of 1999. the appellants  case is that the individual and corporate appellants other than harshad mehta  ashwin mehta and sudhir mehta filed applications  within the prescribed period  before the special court praying for their de notifications. however  by an order dated 14 july 2000  the said applications were permitted to be withdrawn with a permission to re file the same. a sur rejoinder thereto was filed on 15 october 2003 and in paragraphs 1 to 6 thereof  the said statements were denied and disputed. by an order dated 30th january  2004  while admitting the appeals  this court directed   the learned counsel for the custodian brings on record the result of the bids and the order of the special court dated 17 december 2003 and 20 january 2004. the learned counsel for the appellants proposes to offer his comments on the bids and the two orders of the special court. let it be done within two weeks. the process of finalizing the bids according to law may be proceeded ahead by the special court. however  the finalization shall be subject to the result of these appeals. the said order  however  was modified and clarified by an order dated 5th may  2004 that the same shall not apply to the sale of commercial properties in view of the order of the learned judge  special court dated 17th october  2003 wherein it was pointed out that the notified parties did not dispute the commercial properties being put to sale by the custodian.
[Ratio of the decision] ii. iii. vii. the act provides for stringent measures. it was enacted for dealing with an extra ordinary situation in the sense that any person who was involved in any offence relating to transaction of any security may be notified whereupon  all his properties stand attached. the provision contained in the act being stringent in nature  the purport and intent thereof must be ascertained having regard to the purpose and object it seeks to achieve. the right of a person notified to file an application or to raise a defence that he is not liable in terms of the provisions of the act or in any event  the properties attached should not be sold in discharge of the liabilities can be taken at the initial stage by filing an application in terms of sub s. 2  of s  4 of the act. but  at the stage when liabilities are required to be discharged  the notified person may inter alia raise a contention inter alia for the purpose of establishing that the properties held and possessed by them are sufficient to meet their liabilities. in terms of the provisions of the act  the special court had been conferred a very wide power. the appellants herein are notified persons in terms of the provisions of the act. therefore  all the properties belonging to them stand attached. such attachment being automatic  no finding was required to be arrived at that the same had been acquired either during the notified period or the appellants were involved in offences in transactions in securities. issues. i whether the appellants being not involved in offences in transactions in securities could have been proceeded against in terms of the provisions of the act. ii whether individual liabilities of the appellants ought to have been separately considered by the special court as not a part of harshad mehta group. iii whether the tax liabilities could not have been held to be due as the order of assessments did not become final and binding. iv whether the commercial properties could have been sold in auction. v whether the residential properties should have been released from attachment. before adverting to the questions raised herein  we may notice that both the parties have raised several contentions before us which have not precisely been raised before the learned special judge. several subsequent events have also been brought to our notice. the parties have also filed several charts before us showing individual assets and liabilities. it has  as noticed hereinbefore  further been contended that various best judgment assessment passed by the assessing authority against some of the appellants have been set aside in appeal and the matters are pending reassessment before the assessing authority. it is not in dispute that the said applications are pending for consideration before the special court. they have not been heard. what would be the effect of the jurisdictional question as regard maintainability of the said application  being barred by limitation  would indisputably fall for consideration before the special court. we  therefore  as at present advised  refrain ourselves from adverting to the said question. the question  however  before us is as to whether any contention which may not have a direct bearing with the question as to whether the special court could entertain their applications for de notifications could be raised by way of defence. it is no doubt true that the law of limitation bars a remedy but not a right. see bombay dyeing   manufacturing co  ltd  v  the state of bombay and others  air 1958 sc 338  savitra khandu beradi v  nagar agricultural sale and purchase co operative society ltd  ahmednagar and others. air 1957 bom 178  1957 indlaw mum 110 and hari raj singh v  sanchalak panchayat. raj u p  govt. lucknow and others. air 1968 all 246   1967 indlaw all 16 but as observed hereinbefore. it would not be proper for us to consider as to whether such a remedy being not available  in terms of s  4 2  of the act can still be determined if raised by way of defence. although  we do not intend to enter into the correctness or otherwise of the said contention of the appellants at this stage  however  there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that they being notified persons  all their properties would be deemed to be automatically attached as a consequent thereto. for the said purpose  it is not necessary that they should be accused of commission of an offence as such. the contention of the appellants to the effect that their properties should have been attached only towards the liabilities incurred by the parties in respect of the transactions made during the statutory period  cannot be accepted as all the appellants being notified  the attachment of the assets would be automatic. l s  synthetics ltd  2004 indlaw sc 715  supra. however  the contention of the appellants that the properties held by them otherwise are sufficient to meet their liabilities was required to be gone into  as  in our considered opinion  there cannot be a any dispute that the appellants have such a right. a corporate veil indisputably can be lifted on several grounds. lifting the corporate veil. the principle of lifting the corporate veil  however  ipso facto would not apply to the individuals. the custodian in a case of this nature may  however  show that the transactions entered into apparently by harshad mehta were intimately connected with acquisition of properties in the name of others. a transaction of benami indisputably can be a subject matter of a lies in terms of s  4 1  of the act as and when such a question is raised  the same may have to be dealt with by the special court appropriately. however  nexus between several persons in dealing with the matter may be established by the custodian. the fact  however  remains that the copies of the documents  books of accounts and other records on the basis whereof the auditors appointed by the court filed their reports had not been shown to the appellants herein  on the premise that they were in know of the things. as the said question has not been gone into by the learned judge  special court  it is necessary that the same be considered and appropriately dealt with. it is open to the appellants  herein to show that even if they continued to be notified  the custodian was not right in clubbing all the individual members of the family as a single entity styled as harshad mehta group. it is interesting to note that the properties belonging to the mother of harshad mehta has since been released from attachment. the learned special court  despite  such a contention having been raised by the appellants in their affidavit in reply did not advert thereto. it is furthermore not in dispute that pursuant to or in furtherance of the directions issued by the learned special court  the accounts of all entities  be it corporate or individual  were drawn up separately which approach had not been dis approved by the auditor appointed by the special court. even in the rejoinder filed by the custodian  e g   paragraphs 14  20  21 and 22  before the special court  such contentions have been raised. our attention has also been drawn to a letter dated 7 october 2003 addressed by all the appellants to the office of the custodian wherein the attention of the custodian was drawn to the fact that all the documents relied upon by him had not been permitted to be inspected and he was requested to forward a report prepared by the chartered accountants in respect of the individual addressors of the letters. the said letter was replied by the custodian by his letter dated 10 october 2003 wherein none of the queries contained in paragraphs 3 to 8 of the said letter was even attempted to be answered. in arriving at the said finding  no contention of the parties raised in their respective affidavits had been adverted to nor any material filed before it was analysed. in our opinion  the learned judge  special court should have analysed the respective contentions of the parties in greater details and in particular in regard to assets and liabilities of the separate entities and having regard to the contentions raised by them that they are not part of the harshad mehta group and their individual liabilities can be met from the assets held and possessed by them separately. the statement annexed to the affidavit of the custodian showed individual break up and in that view of the matter the net asset picture of each individual of the appellants herein on individual basis and the effect thereof  in our opinion  should have received serious consideration at the hands of the learned special court. the custodian in terms of the directions issued by the learned special court had affirmed an affidavit putting on record the assets and liabilities of each of the members of the so called harshad mehta group on an individual basis. allegedly  therein it was shown that the individuals had received large loans  advances  credits from the harshad mehta group and there had been intermingling of the assets to the tune of crores of rupees. before us  mr  desai had filed a chart for showing the same. before us a chart has been produced by the appellants herein as regards mrs  deepika mehta to show her liabilities payable as on 8th june  1992 which are as under   chart showing comparison of payables as on 8th june  1992. we  therefore  have not been given a clear picture as to the correctness or otherwise of the affidavit filed by the custodian vis a vis the books of accounts which have been maintained by the appellants themselves as well as the auditor s report. the learned judge merely accepted the figures mentioned in the affidavit of the custodian and relied thereupon in the judgment without discussing the contentions and arguments raised on behalf of the appellants  herein. we  therefore  are of the opinion  in the interest of justice  that it is necessary to give another opportunity of hearing to the appellants. it is true that horrendous figures as regard the liabilities of harshad mehta have been projected before us but the same had been shown to be of the entire group. if the liabilities of the individual entities are not treated as that of the group  for one reason or the other  indisputably  liability of those who have nothing to do with the dealings of harshad mehta either in their individual capacities or as directors of some company or otherwise must be dealt with separately. this may be so  but then the effect of the rival contentions was required to be gone into by the learned special court. a finding of fact arrived at upon discussing and analyzing the respective contentions could have gone a long way in assisting this court in arriving at a correct conclusion. the learned judge proceeded on the basis that the assets and liabilities  joint and collective  of all those who are related with harshad mehta as also the corporate entities in which he was a director or had some other interest must be considered as a group. even in this behalf  it was necessary for the special judge to assign sufficient and cogent reasons. a question may further arise as to whether the learned judge was correct in considering the individual liabilities of the notified parties as the liabilities of the group. if those individuals  who had no connection with harshad mehta could not have been proceeded against for meeting the liabilities of harshad mehta jointly or severally  a clear finding was required to be arrived at. only because there had been large intermingling and flow of funds from harshad mehta and inter se within the group  the same by itself may not justify the conclusion that all of their assets were required to be sold irrespective of their individual involvement. it was  thus  necessary for the learned special court to arrive at a firm conclusion as regard the involvement of the individuals with harshad mehta  if any  and the extent of his liability as such. furthermore  the question as regard liability of the parties should have been determined at the stage of section 9 a of the act. it had  however  never been the case of the custodian that the examination of claims of all the notified parties is complete. it does not appear that claims inter se between the entities within the so called group had ever been taken into consideration. the custodian does not appear to have preferred claims before the special court on behalf of the largest lender on the so called group against those he had to recover loans. such claims may also be preferred. the act confers wide power upon the custodian and the learned special court and in that view of the matter  having regard to the principles of natural justice  the judgment and order of the learned judge  special court should have furthermore been supported by sufficient and cogent reasons. tax liability. it is not in dispute that the tax liabilities of the appellants individually were assessed on the basis of best judgment assessment. it is  furthermore not in dispute that in a large number of cases the appellate authorities have set aside best judgment assessments. the contention of the appellant to the effect that the income tax dues should have been considered at the point of time when they become recoverable cannot be accepted having regard to the 3 judge bench decision of this court in b c  dalal 2005 indlaw sc 1826  supra  wherein this court categorically held that in absence of any order of stay granted by the higher court  the liabilities would remain. we may further notice that the learned special court relied upon a decision in custodian v  union of india and ors. misc. petition no  64 of 1998  disposed of on 17th august  2000  wherein allegedly a dichotomy between sale and distribution was sought to be resolved in terms of the decision of this court in harshad shantilal mehta. indlaw sc 732  supra   the appeal where against being civil appeal no  5812 of 2000 was dismissed by this court by an order dated 4 december 2000 stating that it was in agreement with the decision of the special court which called for no interference. this court  therefore  has laid down a law that mere filing of an appeal is not sufficient  particularly  when there is no order of stay on recovery has been granted and the demand is outstanding. but  in this case  the orders of assessment have been set aside. if the orders of assessment have been set aside the liabilities of the appellants have to be worked out on the basis of the new orders of assessment. so long  such orders of assessment are not passed by the competent assessing authorities  it cannot be said that the appellants are liable to pay a huge amount by way of income tax dues on the basis of such orders of assessment which have since been set aside. a chart has been annexed to the additional written submissions filed by mr  desai  which originated from a letter dated 9th december  2005 issued by the office of the commissioner of income tax showing the current status of the liabilities of the individual members of the harshad mehta group in the following terms    i. ashwin mehta rs. 1396 crores   ii. deepika mehta rs. 120 crores  even after deducting the amount set aside by itat. it exceeds rs  63 crores. iii. late harshad mehta rs. 11829 crores. iv  jyoti mehta rs. 1457 crores. v  hitesh mehta rs. 73 crores  vi. pratima mehta rs. 115 crores  even after deducting the amount set aside by itat. it exceeds rs. 35 crores   vii. sudhir mehta rs. 339 crores  viii. aatur holdings rs. 15 95 crores  even after deducting the amount set aside by itat. 2 7 crores. the custodian has further brought on records that if the transactions by or on behalf of corporate entity  viz   aatur holdings pvt  ltd  and dr  pratima mehta by way of illustration are taken into consideration  the same would reveal their modus operandi to the effect that the moneys were diverted from banks and financial institutions by late harshad mehta which were in turn diverted to his family concerns and family members. these moneys were used for speculative transactions and securities and the profits generated was used for acquiring assets. the learned special court  having not arrived at such a finding  this court is not in a position to go into the correctness or otherwise thereabout. in any view of the matter  the learned judge  special court having not dealt with the question as regard the mode and manner of disbursements of the amount so far as the tax liabilities of the appellants are concerned elaborately  the same requires fresh determination in the light of the decision of this court in harshad shantilal mehta. 1998 indlaw sc 732  supra. in fact  the appellants have brought on records various orders passed by income tax appellate authorities to show that the demands of the revenue have been set aside. furthermore  the orders of the appellate authority have been passed during pendency of this appeal. this court  it is trite  can take into consideration the subsequent events. such subsequent events could also be taken into consideration for the purpose of review. in view of the aforementioned pronouncement of law  we are of the opinion that it is absolutely necessary to request the learned special court to consider the matter afresh. sale of commercial properties has never been seriously contested by the appellants. this court also in its order dated 5th may  2004 clarified that the interim order dated 30th january  2004 shall not be applicable as regard sale of commercial properties as even before this court the same had not been questioned. it is  furthermore  not in dispute that third party rights have since been created by reason of sale of a large number of commercial properties. we  therefore  do not interfere with that part of the order whereby and wherewith the auction sale  as regard commercial properties  had been directed by the learned judge  special court. the learned judge  special court  may  therefore  proceed to pass an appropriate order as regard confirmation of the sale of such properties. residential property. in these appeals  we are concerned with sale of eight residential flats in a building known as madhuli. the flat belonging to the mother of late harshad mehta has been released. the flats  however  during pendency of these appeals have been sold in auction. one of the flats being flat. no  202. arunachal bhawan  barakhamba road  is subject matter of a separate proceeding pending before this court  viz   civil appeal. no  681 of 2004. in these appeals  we are not concerned with the said flat. admittedly  the flats have been sold subject to the result of these appeals. the flats have been sold on the basis of the joint liabilities of the appellants together with harshad mehta and other companies as a group. the liabilities of the appellants  in view of our findings aforementioned  are required to be considered afresh by the learned judge  special court. the purchasers have also filed applications for their impleadment in these appeals. we  however  have not heard the purchasers as the question as to whether the auction sale of the said flats will be confirmed or not will depend upon the ultimate finding of the learned judge  special court upon consideration of the matter afresh in the light of the observations made hereinbefore. we  therefore  would direct that the confirmation of sale of those flats be considered and appropriate order thereupon may be passed by the learned special court while considering the matter afresh. in the light of the directions issued herein  it would be for the purchasers of the said flats to wait till a final decision is made or take back the amount deposited by them  subject to any other or further order  s  that may be passed by the learned special judge. conclusion. in view of our foregoing discussions  we are of the opinion that   i. the contention of the appellants that they being not involved in offences in transactions in securities could not have been proceeded in terms of the provisions of the act cannot be accepted in view of the fact that they have been notified in terms thereof. the appellants being notified persons all their personal properties stood automatically attached and any other income from such attached properties would also stand attached. the question as to whether the appellants could have been considered to be part of harshad mehta group by the learned special court need not be determined by us as  at present advised  in view of the fact that appropriate applications in this behalf are pending consideration before the learned special court. the question as regard intermingling of accounts by the appellants  herein with that of the harshad mehta group and  or any other or further contentions raised by the parties hereto before us shall receive due consideration of the learned judge  special court afresh in the light of the observations made hereinbefore. as regard the tax liabilities of the appellants  herein  we would request the learned judge  special court to consider the matter afresh in the light of the observations made hereinbefore. the learned judge  special court  in this behalf  having regard to the fact that several orders of best judgment assessment have been passed by the assessing authority  may take into consideration the ratio laid down in the decision of this court in harshad shantilal mehta. the learned special court shall proceed to pass appropriate orders as regard confirmation of the auction sales in respect of commercial properties. v  as regard  sale of residential properties  an appropriate order may be passed by the learned judge  special court in the light of the observations made hereinbefore. vi. we direct the custodian to permit the appellants to have inspection of all the documents in his power or possession in the premises of the special court in the presence of an officer of the court. such documents must be placed for inspection for one week continuously upon giving due notice therefor to the appellants jointly. as the appellants have been represented in all the proceedings jointly  only one of them would be nominated by them to have the inspection thereof. the appellants shall be entitled to take the help of a chartered or cost accountant and may make notes therefrom for their use in the pending proceeding. the appellants shall file their objections to the said report  if any  within ten days thereafter. the custodian may also take assistance and  or further assistance from a chartered accountant of his choice. a reply and  or rejoinder thereto shall be filed within one week from the date of the receipt of the copy of the objection. the parties shall file their respective documents within one week thereafter. such documents should be supported by affidavits. both the parties shall be entitled to inspect such documents and filed their responses thereto within one week thereafter. the parties shall file the written submissions filed before this court together with all charts before the learned special judge  special court within eight weeks from date. viii. the learned judge  special court shall allow the parties to make brief oral submissions with pointed reference to their written submissions. such hearing in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case should continue from day to day. ix. the learned judge  special court while hearing the matter in terms of this order shall also consider as to whether the auction sale should be confirmed or not. it will also be open to the learned judge  special court to pass an interim order or orders  as it may think fit and proper  in the event any occasion arises therefor. x  we would  however  request the learned special judge  special court to complete the hearings of the matter  keeping in view of the fact that auction sale in respect of the residential premises is being consideration  as expeditiously as possible and not later than twelve weeks from the date of the receipt of the copy of this order. save and except for sufficient or cogent reasons  the learned judge shall not grant any adjournment to either of the parties. xi. the learned judge  special court shall take up the matter relating to confirmation of the auction sale in respect of the commercial properties immediately and pass an appropriate order thereupon within four weeks from the date of receipt of copy of this order. if in the meanwhile orders of assessment are passed by the income tax authorities  the custodian shall be at liberty to bring the same to the notice of the learned special court which shall also be taken into consideration by the learned judge  special court.

[Facts] these three appeals by special leave are directed against one and the same judgment dated 25 09 l992 of the division bench of calcutta high court. the three appellants are the state of west bengal in appeal arising out of slp  c  no 401 of 1993 the state fishery development corporation ltd in appeal arising out of slp  c  no 13516 of 1992 and bansilal farms in appeal arising out of slp  c  no 13314 of 1992. the respondents are the members of one sarkar family in the city of calcutta. the dispute centres around a fishery called nalban fishery. a suit for partition was filed by one of the co sharers of said sarkar family in the high court of calcutta on 3 9 1955 which was registered as suit no 2539 of 1955 the schedule of properties included the disputed nalban fishery. a learned single judge of the calcutta high court passed a preliminary decree in the said suit on 11 8 1960 one of the co sharers of the sarkar family preferred an appeal against the preliminary decree before the division bench which was registered as appeal no 200 of 1960 during the pendency of the aforesaid appeal the state of west. bengal requisitioned large extent of fisheries including the disputed nalban fishery on 5 11 1969 in exercise of power under section 3 1  of the west bengal land requisition and acquisition act of 1948  hereinafter referred to as  the requisition act   pursuant to the aforesaid requisition order the state of west bengal took possession of the nalban fishery on 8 11 1969 members of the sarkar family challenged the order of requisition by filing a writ petition in calcutta high court in november 1969 which was registered as civil rule no 7317  w  of 1969 the aforesaid writ petition was dismissed by the learned single judge. the appeal to the division bench was preferred against the aforesaid order of dismissal which was registered as f m a no 126 of 1970 the division bench dismissed the appeal by its order dated 5 7 1971 sarkar family moved this court in slp  c. no 1452 of 1972 by order dated 17 11 1972. this court dismissed the special leave petition. the appeal arising out of the petition suit bearing suit no 2539 of 1955 which had been registered as appeal no 200 of 1960 was finally disposed of by the division bench and the said order was assailed in this court in slp  c  nos 5370   5371 of 1978 the said two appeals arising out of the said two special leave petitions were disposed of by order dated 18 4 1979 on the basis of a compromise arrived at between the parties on intervention of shri ashok sen who appearing for one of the parties but it was indicated in the order that the state s right in relation to the fisheries will not be affected by the decree in question. prior to the passing of the aforesaid order on april 18 1979 while granting special leave petition on 10 11 1978 this court had directed that the state of west bengal will be made a party to the proceeding and further the collector parganas was appointed as receiver in respect of the fisheries owned by the sarkar family. the court had also further directed that the collector will be the receiver in respect of the fisheries which has not already been vested in the state and whose possession has not already been taken over by the state. pursuant to the aforesaid order appointing collector 24 parganas as receiver. the collector 24 parganas took possession of the fisheries including nalban fishery as receiver and submitted a compliance report dated 22 11 1978 to the registrar of this court. it may be noted that nalban fishery had been requisitioned by the state of west bengal under the provisions of requisition act since 5 11 1969 and possession thereof had been taken on 8 11 1969 and the sarkar family had challenged the said order unsuccessfully which final by the dismissal of the special leave petition by this court on 17 11 1972 on 25 5 1979 the collector 24 parganas who had been appointed as receiver realised that he could not have taken possession of nalban fishery as receiver since the said fishery had already been in possession of the state of west bengal pursuant to requisition order dated 5 11 1969 obviously the earlier compliance report dated 20 11 1978 that the receiver has taken possession of the nalban fishery was a symbolic one inasmuch as the state of west. bengal was in fact in possession of the said fishery. the receiver therefore intimated to the registrar of this court the mistake committed by him in his earlier report and after taking advice from the senior counsel expressed apology to this court for the mistake committed in the earlier report while the matter stood thus in relation to the aforesaid nalban fishery the government of west bengal handed over the possession of the said nalban fishery to the director of inland fisheries state fisheries development corporation for undertaking fisheries development scheme. the aforesaid corporation issued an advertisement for auctioning the nalban fishery for a boating complex. the sarkar family thereupon filed an application before the calcutta high court contending inter alia that under the decree passed in the partition suit by the supreme court the property belongs to the sarkar family and could not have been handed over to the state of west bengal that application was disposed of by the learned single called upon the collector 24 parganas who was the receiver pursuance to the orders of the supreme court to take over the possession of nalban fishery from the state of west bengal and give vacant possession of the same to the sarkar family. this order of the learned single judge was challenged in appeal before the division bench and the division bench having dismissed the same the present appeals have been preferred. it may be noticed at this stage that bansilal farms appellant in appeal arising out of slp  c  no 13314 of 1992 was the highest offerer for running the boating complex on the surface water of nalban fishery and had been granted licence for that purpose and in fact had started the operation of the boating complex since 1991 but on the application of mrs. dhira mitra one of the co sharers of the sarkar family the high court having issued an order of injunction the farm is no longer operating.
[Ratio of the decision] the calcutta high court both the learned single judge as well as the division bench committed serious error of law in directing the receiver to take possession of nalban fishery from the state of west bengal and deliver the vacant possession of the same to the members of the sarkar family. the subsequent incumbent to the post of district magistrate 24 parganas who became the receiver by virtue of his official position had no further jurisdiction to re deliver possession of the nalban fishery to the state of west bengal and the comments already made by the high court on the report of the subsequent receiver sufficiently indicate how he had acted with the bias mind and consequently the nalban fishery having not vested in the state of west bengal under the acquisition act the decree passed by the supreme court on 18 4 1979 remains operative. judged from this view there is no infirmity with the direction issued by the learned single judge as well as division bench of the calcutta high court warranting interference by this court. in view of the rival submissions at the bar the first question that arises for consideration is whether in the suit for partition amongst the members of the sarkar family which was ultimately disposed of by a compromise decree in this court nalban fishery had been allotted to some members of the sarkar family and whether such decree would affect the rights of the state and bind the state of west. bengal. the nalban fishery was one of the items of property in the suit for partition is not disputed. it is also not disputed that the state of west bengal though was not a party to the suit but in course of proceeding before this court by an order of the court the said state of west bengal was impleaded as a party. the aforesaid order directing impleadment of the state of west bengal as a 7 party was obviously intended for the purpose that the interest of the state and the rights of the state in relation of the state and the rights of the state in relation of the state and the rights of the state in relation to several fisheries could be protected. further while directing the receiver to handover possession of the various fisheries covered by the final decree to the parties to whom they have been allotted under the decree this court also protected the interest of the state by observing   we made it quite clear that this will not in any manner prejudice or affect the right of the state to its claim over the fisheries under the west bengal acquisition act 1955  west bengal act 1 of 1954  or under any other statute. it is an undisputed fact that nalban fishery had been requisitioned much prior to the aforesaid decree of this court dated 18 4 1979 and therefore the rights of the state to the fishery either by virtue of the requisition order or by virtue of any provision of any other statute remained protected and as such said state of west. bengal can t be bound down by the so called allotment of fisheries in favour of some members of the sarkar family under the compromise decree in question. the dismissal of the special leave petition as aforesaid affirmed that the nalban fishery had been legally requisitioned by the state of west bengal and the state was in possession of the same since 8 11 1969. the next question that arises for consideration is whether the receiver appointed by this court was at all entitled to take possession of the nalban fishery pursuant to the order of this court or the nalban fishery could not have been taken possession by the receiver and therefore the second receiver rightly corrected the mistake committed by his predecessor. from the report submitted by the receiver it transpired that the district magistrate 24 parganas who was appointed as receiver took possession of several fisheries including nalban fishery obviously on the impression that the lease in respect of the said fishery which had been granted by the sarkar family had lapsed. the said receiver was not aware of the fact that nalban fishery had in fact requisitioned by the state of west bengal and the state is in possession of the same since november 1369 the possession  thus taken by the receiver of the vast extent tank fishery is obviously a symbolical possession but in view of the order of this court dated 18 4 1979 as well as 22 4 1979 while passing a decree in terms of compromise arrived at between the parties and on the admitted position that state had already come into possession of the fishery by virtue of the order under the requisition act the said fishery remained out of the purview of the allotment made by the sarkar family in the compromise and therefore the receiver could not have taken possession of the same. the successor receiver in the circumstances therefore was fully justified in bringing it to the notice of this court by giving a second report indicating therein that his predecessor had erroneously taken the possession of nalban fishery which is in contravention of the directions of this court dated 18 4 1979 and for which the receiver offered his unconditional apology. we do not find any force in the contention of mr. gupta appearing for the respondents that the succeeding receiver had no jurisdiction to re deliver the possession of nalban fishery is the state of west bengal when his predecessor has already taken possession of the same pursuant to the order of this court. the receiver appointed by a court is an officer of the court. the said receiver will be fully justified in rectifying any mistake or error committed by him while implementing the direction of the court. we do not find any illegality in the act of the succeeding receiver in rectifying the earlier mistake and re delivering the possession of nalban fishery to the state of west bengal. as has been stated earlier the possession which was taken by the earlier receiver was a symbolical one and factually the state had not been divested of its possession which it took on 8 11 1969 in our considered opinion the succeeding receiver rightly took into account the directions of this court passed on 18 4 1979 and 24 4 1979 and rightly took the view that the rights and interest of the state in relation to nalban fishery is not affected in any manner by the so called allotment of the fishery in the partition decree amongst the members of the sarkar family. the next question that arises for consideration is whether the order of hon ble mr. justice deepak kumar sen dated 6 10 1980 would operate as res judicata since the state did not challenge the same. from the order in question which has been annexed as annexure p to the special leave petition  c  no 13314 of 1992 it appears that the order was passed on the application on one of the members of sarkar family mr. pulak sarkar. the state of west bengal was neither a party to the proceedings nor was noticed by the high court before passing the order. the order was in fact a direction to the collector 24 paraganas who had been appointed as a receiver by the supreme court in the pending appeal before it. no reasons have been given by the learned judge in issuing the said directing and on the other hand the order appears to be bald order calling upon and thereafter carry out the directions of the hon ble supreme court in respect of the same. the aforesaid order cannot be held to operate as res judicata taking away the rights of the state of west. bengal in respect of the nalban fishery as the state was not a party to the proceedings. besides the direction of the learned judge to the effect   the collector 24 paraganas is directed to allow messers ghose and saha surveyors to make proper demarcation in the nalban fishery dividing the same in two lots. after such demarcation is made the commissioner of partition is directed to approve the same and carry out the direction of the honble supreme court in respect thereof   does not in any way take away rights of the state of west. bengal which is otherwise protected by the supreme court while passing the compromise decree. the direction of the learned single judge on the other hand is to carry out the directions of the supreme court in respect of the nalban fishery. in view of our earlier conclusion that the rights and interest of the state of west bengal was not in any way be affected by the so called partition and allotment of the nalban fishery inter se amongst the members of the sarkar family the said order dated 63 10 1980 passed by the learned single judge of the calcutta high court will not stand on the way of the state in claiming and putting forth its interest and right over the nalban fishery. the contention of mr. gupta appearing for the respondents therefore cannot be sustained. the next question that arises for consideration is what is the effect of the amendment to the west bengal land reforms act which was amended in the year 1986 but with retrospective effect. it is no doubt true that a writ petition has been filed challenging the validity of the aforesaid act and notification issued there under in relation to vary nalban fishery which is still pending and therefore it would not be proper for us to examine the provisions of the emended west bengal land reforms act and to express any opinion thereon. suffice it to say that under the amended provisions of the west bengal land reforms act tank fishery being included in the land would vest in the state by combined reading of sections 3a and 14 and therefore the state cannot be divested of the rights accruing by the amended provisions until the amended provisions are declared invalid by a competent court of law. since we have been informed that the writ petition challenging the amended act is still pending in the calcutta high court we may observe that our conclusion hereunder in relation to applicability of the amended provisions of the west bengal land reforms act so far as nalban fishery is concerned would be subject to the constitutionality itself to be decided by the high court in the pending writ petition.

[Facts] yakshagana  is a form of ballet dance. it has its own heritage. indisputably dr. kota shivarama karanth  for short  dr. karanth   a jnanapeeth awardee who was a novelist play writer essayist encyclopediationist cultural anthropologist artist writer of science environmentalist. he developed a new form of  yakshagana  he was a director of the appellant  institute. on or about 18 6 1994 he executed a will in favour of the respondent. karanth expired on 9 12 1997 yakshagana ballet dance as developed by dr. karanth was performed in new delhi on or about 18 9 2001 respondent filed a suit for declaration injunction and damages alleging violation of the copyright in respect of the said dance vested in her in terms of the said will stating that dr. karanth developed a new distinctive dance drama troop or theatrical system which was named by him as  yaksha ranga  which in his own words mean  creative extension of traditional yakshagana  and thus the appellants infringed the copyright thereof by performing the same at new delhi without obtaining her prior permission. it was stated that dr. karanth had composed seven verses or prasangas for staging yaksharanga ballet apart from bringing in changes in the traditional form thereof on its relevant aspects namely raga tala scenic arrangement costumes etc. these prasangas are   i  bhishma vijaya   ii  nala damayanthi   iii  kanakangi or kanakangi kalyana   iv  abhimanyu or abhimanyu vada   v  chitrangadha or babruvahana kalaga   vi  panchavati  and  vii. ganga charitha. plaintiff  respondent admittedly claimed copyright in respect of  literary and artistic works  in her favour in terms of clauses 11 and 12 of the said will dated 18 6 1994 which read as under   11 since i left the house  suhasa  i have been living in a specially built house  manasa  of smt. malini mallya who has built it with borrowed money at her cost. she had joined my service as copyist and later she secured an employment in life insurance corporation of india. ever since 1974 till now in my old age she has been serving me with exemplary devotion and sincerity. and in this occasion i must also acknowledge with gratitude that she diligently cared and nursed my wife leela karanth during her prolonged illness till her last day. and she has cared and looked after me also during my illness which at times had been quite serious enfeebling me for long period. in recognition of her devotion and sincere affection towards me in 1986 i have dedicated one of my novels namely  antida aparanji  to her. i have also placed on record her invaluable services to me in my memoirs  hunchu mansina hathu mukhagalu  1991 edition. in my opinion very long enduring and a signal service she has done to me and to my literary works is in writing a bibliography of all my books a highly meritorious and scholarly work involving so much of pains taking research that it has been acclaimed and rated as the first of its kind in kannada and highly appreciated by critics and scholars. apart from this she has collected and edited all my stray writings from 1924 onwards up to date in eight sumptuous volumes which are being published by mangalore university. this work also has brought her deserving fame and appreciation of scholars. such painstaking service in this direction has brought to light several of my hitherto untraced forgotten and unknown writings and thereby giving them extended or renewed lease of life. for all these services i hereby declare that after my death copyrights in respect of all my literary works shall vest with smt. malini mallya and she alone shall be entitled to receive royalties of all my books and she shall be entitled to print publish and republish and market the same. whatever she may earn thereby shall be her exclusive income and property. no one else shall have any right or claims for the same 12 from time to time i have distributed among my children all gold and silver jewels and ornaments and other valuables which were gifted to me by my friends and admirers. and i have distributed all copper and bronze vessels and utensils among my children while leaving my former home  suhasa  keeping only bare essential and necessary things and articles. whatever movable properties books fittings furniture utensils etc belonging to me into this house  manasa  and my car and cash money in hand after my death shall go to smt. malini malya only. no one else shall have any claim or right over the same. any outstanding due to me and bank deposits and whatever assets or properties not mentioned above that is residuary after my death shall belong to smt. malini mallya alone. plaintiff respondent inter alia prayed for passing a judgment and decree against the defendants  appellants granting the following reliefs   1 a declaration that the plaintiff is the exclusive copyright holder in respect of yaksharanga ballets namely bhishma vijaya kanakangi nala damayanthi panchavati gaya charitha chitrangadha abhimanyu vadha and for consequential permanent injunction restraining the defendants their agents employees etc from staging or performing any of the above said 7 ballets or prasangas or any parts thereof. 1 000 00 2 directing the defendants to pay to the plaintiff damages of rs 15 000  towards infringement of her copyright on account of stating or performing abhimanyu vadha on 18 9 2001 at new delhi. 15 000 00 3 directing the defendants to pay to the plaintiff interest on rs 15 000  at 15  p a from 18 9 2001 till now which is 95 00. 4 directing the defendants to pay future interest on rs 15 000  at 15  p a till payment of the entire amount. appellants in their written statement however denied and disputed any copyright of the said dance in dr. karanth alleging that whatever work he had done was in the capacity of a director of the kendra with the assistance finance and staff provided by the organization of mahatma gandhi memorial college trust in respect whereof a committee was formed under him by the board of trustees. it was furthermore contended that dr. karanth was appointed as the president of the executive committee of yakshagana kendra for a period of three years by the appellant and while holding the said post only he expired. by reason of a judgment and decree dated 14 11 2003 the district judge udupi decreed the said suit declaring the plaintiff  respondent as a person having the exclusive copyright in respect of seven prasangas and that she had acquired the same by reason of a will as a residuary legatee and the defendants  appellants or their employees or agents were restrained from performing the said seven ballets or prasangas or any parts thereof in any manner as evolved distinctively by dr. karanth. appellants aggrieved thereby and dissatisfied therewith preferred an appeal before the karnataka high court which was marked as r f a no 271 of 2004. by reason of the impugned judgment and order dated 5 12 2007 the said appeal has been dismissed. appellants are thus before us. the learned trial judge on issue no 4 opined that plaintiff had not been able to prove actual loss or damage particularly having regard to the fact that dr. karanth had associated himself with the appellants for a long time. the learned trial judge recognized the equitable interest vested in the plaintiff  respondent. a declaratory decree therefore was passed.
[Ratio of the decision] ii. iii. before adverting to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties we may notice the issues framed in the suit which are    i  does plaintiff prove that late dr. shivaramaji karanth had acquired copyright in respect of seven yakshagana prasangas and also in respect of yakshagana dramatic or theatrical form i e  bhishma. vijaya nala damayanthi kanakaangti or kanakangi kalyana abhimanyu or abhimanyu vadha chitrangadha or babruvahana kalaga panchavati chritha followed in the plaint. has the plaintiff became entitled to the said right under the registered will dated 18 06 1994. does the plaintiff prove that her right under the said will was infringed by the defendants. broadly speaking a dramatic work may also come within the purview of literary work being a part of dramatic literature. the new encyclopaedia britannica  vol iv  15th edition provides the following information about  dramatic literature. dramatic literature  the texts of plays that can be read as distinct from being seen and heard in performance. we must however notice that the provisions the act make a distinction between the  literary work  and  dramatic work  keeping in view the statutory provisions there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that copyright in respect of performance of  dance  would not come within the purview of the literary work but would come within the purview of the definition of  dramatic work  we however do not mean to suggest that any act of literary work will be outside the purview of the will dated 18 6 1994 our exercise in this behalf was only for the purpose of clarifying the provisions of the act with reference to the findings arrived at by the high court. for the aforementioned reasons we agree with dr. dhavan that paragraph 12 of the will namely residuary clause shall apply in the instant case apart from the areas which are otherwise covered by paragraph 11 of the will. the residuary clause will apply because it is well settled that no part of the stay lies in limbo. it was also not a case where respondent in any manner whatsoever waived her right. decree for injunction is an equitable relief. the courts while passing a decree for permanent injunction would avoid multiplicity of proceedings. the court while passing such a decree is obligated to consider the statutory provisions governing the same. for the said purpose it must be noticed as to what is a copyright and in respect of the matters the same cannot be claimed or otherwise the same is lodged by conditions and subject to statutory limitation. the high court in our opinion should have clarified that the appellants can also take the statutory benefit of the provisions contained in clauses  a   i  and  l  of sub section  1  of section 52 of the act. section 52 of the act provides for certain acts which would not constitute an infringement of copyright. when a fair dealing is made inter alia of a literary or dramatic work for the purpose of private use including research and criticism or review whether of that work or of any other work the right in terms of the provisions of the said act cannot be claimed. thus if some performance or dance is carried out within the purview of the said clause the order of injunction shall not be applicable. similarly appellant being an educational institution if the dance is performed within the meaning of provisions of clause  i  of sub section  1  of section 52 of the act strictly the order of injunction shall not apply thereto also. yet again if such performance is conducted before a non paying audience by the appellant which is an institution if it comes within the purview of amateur club or society the same would not constitute any violation of the said order of injunction.

[Facts] the appellant claimed to be the tenant in respect of the two premises which are quite adjacent to each other one of which is involved in this appeal. the respondent is the landlord of the two premises and these were situated at raikhad ward ahmedabad. the respondent had alleged in the two suits that the appellant was his tenant in the suit premises which were leased out to him and before him his father for conducting the business in the name of ahmedabad fine. weaving works and according to the terms of tenancy suit premises were leased for manufacturing cloth in the name of ahmedabad fine. weaving works. the respondent had further alleged that the appellant no 1 had closed the business and he was not using the said premises for the purpose for which it was let to him. it was the case of the appellant that in respect of the suit premises he was carrying on his business with respondents. nos 2 4 and 5 in the name of respondent no 2 m s. bharat neon signs  hereinafter referred to as respondent no 2. at the time of the institution of the suit the defendants nos 2 to 5 were admittedly the partners. the present appellant who was the original defendant no 1 claimed to be a partner. the main controversy was whether the appellant had sublet the premises to defendant no 2 bharat neon signs or whether he being a partner of the said firm had permitted the said firm to use the premises in question. it is clear from the evidence on record that the partnership firm had undergone metamorphosis from time to time and again ever since the year 1960 the firm bharat neon signs first originated on 4th of october 1960 as many as six persons were named in the partnership firm on or about 4th of october 1960 and they had executed a deed of partnership on 13th of october 1960 which is exhibit 114 on the record. the said partnership deed records six persons who were to run the business in manufacturing and selling bharat neon signs tubes. on or about 24th of october 1960. another partnership deed being exhibit 69 came to be executed among the six persons and the father of the appellant girdharlal. the document is exhibit 69 and is signed by the father of the appellant and the appellant himself also. in 1965 some partners retired and the remaining four partners executed a fresh partnership deed exhibit 117 on 1st. april 1965 this last partnership deed was executed by the appellant and original defendants. nos 3 4 and 5. the suit inter alia was filed by the landlord on the ground of subletting. the respondent plaintiff had alleged in both the suits that the appellant was his tenant in the suit premises which were leased to him for conducting his business in the name of ahmedabad fine. weaving works and according to the terms of tenancy suit the suit premises were leased for manufacturing cloth in the name of ahmedabad fine   weaving works. the landlord had alleged that the appellant had closed that business and he was not using the premises in question for the purpose for which it was let to him. it was further alleged by the landlord that the appellant had unlawfully sublet the major part of the premises in question of both the suits to defendant nos 2 to 5 in the original suit and these defendants were running business in partnership for manufacturing of neon signs in the name of bharat neon signs. it was further alleged that the appellant had also unlawfully sublet one room of the suit premises to defendant no 6 in suit no 553 of 1969 who was residing in that room. there was an appeal filed from that decree and that appeal was also dismissed and disposed of affirming the decree for the dissolution of the partnership inter se between the parties being the partners of the said firm. these facts were accepted that there was a partnership. in any event all these factors were considered by the court of small causes bearing in mind the correct legal principles. the high court on a reappraisal of these very evidence came to the conclusion that the partnerships were camouflages and were not acted upon and in fact and in reality the partnership firm was a sub tenant of the appellant herein.
[Ratio of the decision] whether the appellant herein and his father had sublet the premises in question in or about 1960 in terms of section 13 1  e  of the bombay rents hotel and lodging house rates control act 1947. hereinafter called the  rent act   is  the question involved in this appeal by special leave from the judgment and order of the high court of gujarat dated 21st of august 1979. in order to decide this question it is necessary to decide the scope and ambit of section 29 2  of the rent act. to decide this facts must be referred to. we are concerned in this appeal with only one of the premises which was involved in suit no 553 of 1969 it is not in dispute and it never was that the premises was being used by bharat neon signs firm being the defendant no 2 in the original suit. however the document is silent as to where the business was started. it may be mentioned that the partnership deed exhibit 114 was executed by six persons and at that stage the appellant or his father were not partners in the firm. but thereafter when the partnership deed exhibit 69 was executed the appellant and his father joined the firm with an agreement to share profits only and their share was fixed at 0 03 paise in a rupee. there is a third partnership deed exhibit 70 which showed that the deceased tenant girdharlal had died on 1st of february 1961 and so by the remaining seven partners with same terms and conditions a new partnership deed being exhibit 70 was executed on 22nd. september 1961 at this time the share of the appellant was fixed at 0 03 paise in a rupee to share the profits only. the main question in issue in this appeal as well as before the high court in revision was whether there was a genuine partnership at the appellant was a partner. it is true that since after 4th of october 1960 the partnership firm was carrying on business in the premises in question. it is well settled that if there was such a partnership firm of which the appellant was a partner as a tenant the same would not amount to subletting leading to the forfeiture of the tenancy. for this proposition see the decision of the gujarat high court in the case of mehta jagjivan vanechand v. doshi vanechand harakhchand and others. a i r 1972 gujarat 6 1970 indlaw guj 68 thakkar j of the gujarat high court as the learned judge then was held that the mere fact that a tenant entered into a partnership and allowed the premises being used for the benefit of partnership does not constitute assignment or subletting in favour of the partnership firm entitling a landlord to recover possession. this view is now concluded by the decision of this court in madras bangalore transport co  west  v. inder singh and others  1986  3 s c c 62 1986. indlaw sc 748. it may be mentioned that the respondent no 1 is the landlord of two premises which were quite adjacent as mentioned before. for the purpose of the suit no 553 of 1969 with which the appeal is concerned it is relevant to state that the appellant had raised the contention that ahmedabad fine   weaving works was not the tenant of the suit premies but the suit premises was tenanted by the father of the appellant girdharlal chimalal in 1938 and he was the original tenant of the premises and appellant subsequently joined the business of his father as a partner and the name of the partnership firm was ahmedabad fine weaving works. it may be mentioned that by the time the revision petition came to be decided by the high court the suit had been decreed in his favour directing a dissolution of the said partnership and directing taking of the accounts. this was set aside in appeal. the appellate court so far as the material for the present appeal is concerned held that there was no subletting and there was only carrying on of the business in partnership with defendants nos 2 to 5 in the name of bharat neon signs. therefore the first question that had to be decided by the appellate court being the court of small causes bombay and if a revision lay before the high court was whether there was any genuine partnership. the partnership deeds were there the appellant was not to share in the losses. the court of small causes came to the conclusion on an analysis of the evidence before it and the terms of the three partnership deeds referred to hereinbefore that there was a genuine partnership in law which was acted upon. the high court in revision reversed that finding. the first question therefore is whether the high court could do so in the facts of this case and secondly whether the high court was right in so doing. whether there was a partnership or not may in certain cases be a mixed question of law and fact in the sense that whether the ingredients of partnership as embodied in the law of partnership were there in a particular case or not must be judged in the light of the principles applicable to partnership. the first question therefore is what is a partnership. that has to be found in section 4 of the indian partnership act 1932 it says  partnership is the relation between persons who have agreed to share the profits of a business carried on by all or any of them acting for all   emphasis supplied. section 6 of the said act reiterates that in determining whether a group of persons is or is not a firm or whether a person is or is not a partner in a firm regard shall be had to the real relation between the parties as shown by all relevant facts taken together. the following important elements must be there in order to establish partnership  1  there must be an agreement entered into by all parties concerned  2. the agreement must be to share profits of business  and  3  the business must be carried on by all or any of the persons concerned acting for all. the partnership deeds were there entitling the petitioner to share in the partnership. it is true that in the partnership deeds the bank accounts were not to be operated by the appellant and further that irrespective of the profit. the clause of the partnership deed provided that there should be a fixed percentage of profit to be given to the partner appellant no 1 the appellant was not to share the losses. but there is nothing illegal about it. the appellant was to bring his asset being the tenancy of the premises in question for the user of the partnership. all these tests were borne in mind by the court of small causes bombay in the appeal from the decision of the learned trial judge. the appellate court had considered the partnership deeds. one point was emphasised by mr. mehta learned counsel appearing for the respondents that the original first partnership deed did not mention the appellant or his father as a partner. it was in the second partnership deed that the appellant and his father joined the firm. the firm started as emphasised by mr. mehta on 4th of october 1960 and it was only on the 24th of october 1960 the second partnership deed was  executed. therefore it was emphasised that there was a gap of time when there was user by the partnership firm of the premises in question when the appellant was not a member of the firm. it was emphasised that this aspect was not considered by the court of small causes and the high court therefore was justified in interfering with the findings of the court of small causes. we are unable to agree. these deeds were there the partners were crossexamined there was no specific evidence as to from what date the firm started functioning from the particular premises in question. secondly it was emphasised by mr. mehta that the partnership deed was a camouflage. it is evident from the sales tax registration and other registration certificates and licences under the shops and establishments act that the partnership was registered in the name of the appellant and the appellant was also indicated as a partner. it was so in the income tax returns and assessments. therefore it was submitted that the court of small causes committed an error of law resulting in miscarriage of justice. it was submitted by mr. mehta that once it was accepted that the partnership deed was a mere camouflage the other subsequent acts and conducts were merely ancillary and were put in a formal way. but the question is from the three deeds itself which were examined in detail by the court of small causes and which were re examined by the high court could it be said unequivocally that there was no partnership. the deeds gave the appellant the right to share the profits and made him agent for certain limited purposes of the firm and there was evidence that the partnership deeds were acted upon. there was evidence of suit of dissolution of the partnership where none of the partners took the plea that it was a false or a fictitious document. though the decree in the dissolution suit was not binding in these proceedings inter se between the parties as partners it is a piece of evidence which cannot be wholly ignored. all these factors were present before the court of small causes. these were reappraised by the high court. mehta. that in the partnership deed which is not necessary to recite the terms the petitioner was completely excluded in operating the bank accounts etc. there is nothing inherently illegal or improbable making a provision of such a type. in the eye of law such a clause is really non sequitur or neutral proving neither the existence nor non existence of a genuine firm. the first partnership deed which is exhibit 114 is dated 13th october 1960 it recited that the partnership firm should be presently started at ahmedabad and the same should later be started in another city. in this the appellant was not a partner exhibit 69 at page 136 of volume ii of the paper book is a partnership deed wherein girdharlal the father of the appellant no 1 and the appellant no 1 joined as partners. it recited that the partnership started from 4th of october 1960 at ahmedabad. it was registered in the name of 7th and 8th partners girdharlal who was the appellant and his father. it was recited that the work of the partnership would be done by the parties of the fourth fifth sixth seventh and eighth as per advice and instructions of the first second and third. all the work had been done by some of the partners of which appellants were not parties and that they had to do the said work as per instructions of the other partners. clauses 6 and 7 of the said partnership deed recited inter alia as follows   6 the year of accounts of our partnership shall be aso vadi 30th day i e. diwali and the first account year is decided to be the aso vadi 30th day of samvat year 2017 while settling accounts at the close of the year 33  amount from the sum which may remain as net profit after deducting all expenditures viz interest discount rent of the shop rent of the godown insurance brokerage travelling telegrams postage salaries of employees etc shall be carried to reserve fund and thereafter in the sum that remains as net profit the shares of us the partners have been fixed as under  7 while settling accounts at the close of the year if the sum less than rs 1500 falls to the 0 03 shares of the partners of the seventh and eighth parts the amount falling short has to be debited towards the head of expenditure and rs 1500  fifteen hundred only  have to be paid in full to each of them two and in those circumstances or if there be loss the parties of the seventh or eighth parts have not been held liable therefore  and in the year or  losses it has been decided to pay rs 1500  fifteen hundred only  to each of them after debiting the same towards the head of expenditure and in the year of losses nothing has to be carried to the  reserve fund  and the loss has to be borne by us to parties first to sixth parts in the following proportion  8 clause 8 empowered the operating of the bank accounts by partners other than the appellant and his father. we find intrinsically nothing improbable. it is embodied in the deeds the functioning of the partnership. the third partnership which is dated 22nd of september 1961 also indicates as parties of sixth part the name of the appellant. the relevant portion of the partnership deed reads as follows   to wit the parties of the first to sixth parts out of us deceased khristi girdharbhai chimanlal and shah virchand keshavji had jointly started the business of manufacturing and selling neon signs tubes in partnership in ahmedabad from 4 10 1960 in the name and style of bharat neon signs. however on account of the death of khristi girdharbhai chimanlal on 1 2 61 and other reasons the said partnership was dissolved from 8 9 61 thereafter we the parties from the first to seventh part have after purchasing at its cost price all the debts and dues goods stock etc  together with goodwill of the dissolved partnership started manufacturing and selling of neon signs tubes in partnership from 9 9 61 we the parties of all the seven parts execute the deed of the said partnership to day. i e 22 9 61 the terms and conditions. thereof are as under. 1  the entire work of our partnership has to be carried out in the name of  bharat neon signs. 2  the work to be carried out by our partnership is of manufacturing and selling neon signs tubes and of obtaining orders therefore. 3  whatever moneys that may be required to be invested in our partnership are to be invested by the parties of the first second third fourth and seventh parts out of us and the interest at the rate of 71 2 per cent per annum has to be paid for the moneys that may be invested in this partnership. we are of the opinion that these were evidence that these terms were acted upon. there was nothing intrinsically wrong in law in constituting a partnership in the manner it was done. this is also not inconsistent with treating the rent of the firm in the context of the total expenditure of the firm. the question is can the high court do so in law. the ambit and power of revision generally and in particular with respect to the provisions with which we are concerned have from time to time come up for consideration by this court. this court in hari shankar v. rao girdhari lal chowdhury  1962  1 suppl. scr 933 1961 indlaw sc 157 had to consider section 35 1  of the delhi   ajmer rent corntrol act 1952. it was held in the majority judgment by hidayatuiiah j as the learned chief justice then was that though section 35 of the delhi and ajmer rent control act was worded in general terms but it did not create a right to have the case re heard. this court emphasised that the distinction between an appeal and revision is a real one. a right to appeal carries with it right of re heating on law as well as fact. unless the statute conferring the right to appeal limits the re hearing in some way. the power to hear a revision is generally given to a superior court so that it may satisfy itself that a particular case is decided according to law. the expression  according to law  in section 35 of the said act referred to the decision as a whole and was not to be equated to errors of law or of fact simpliciter. this court was of the view that what the high court could see is that there has been no miscarriage of justice and that the decision was according to law in the sense mentioned. kapur j who delivered a separate judgment however observed that the power under section 35 1  of the said act of interference by the high court is not restricted to a proper trial according to law or error in regard to onus of proof or proper opportunity of being heard. it is very much wider than that when in the opinion of the high court the decision is erroneous on the question of law which affects the merits of the case or decision was manifestly unjust the high court is entitled to interfere. the revisional authority could ensure that there was no miscarriage of justice and the principles of law have been correctly borne in mind the facts had been properly comprehended in that light. if that was done in a particular case then the fact that the revisional authority or the high court might have arrived to a different conclusion is irrelevant. this view had also been expressed in the decision of this court in puranchand v. motilal  1963. supp 2 s c r 906 1962 indlaw sc 455. the jurisdiction of high court is to correct all errors of law going to the root of the decision which would in such cases include even perverse findings of facts perverse in the sense that no reasonable person acting judicially and properly instructed in the relevant law could arrive at such a finding on the evidence on the record. in this view in our opinion the ambit of the power was expressed in rather wide amplitude. as we read the power the high court must ensure that the principles of law have been correctly borne in mind. secondly the facts have been properly appreciated and a decision arrived at taking all material and relevant facts in mind. it must be such a decision which no reasonable man could have arrived at. lastly such a decision does not lead to a miscarriage of justice. we must however guard ourselves against permitting in the guise of revision substitution of one view where two views are possible and the court of small causes has taken a particular view. if a possible view has been taken the high court would be exceeding its jurisdiction to substitute its own view with that the courts below because it considers it to be a better view. the fact that the high court would have taken a different view is wholly irrelevant. judged by that standard we are of the opinion that the high court in this case had exceeded its jurisdiction. the authority vested in the high court under the amendment still remained only in the domain of the jurisdiction and power of revision and no further. the amending provision therefore only related to procedure and not to any rights of the parties. in the instant case the basic question is whether keeping in background the partnership deeds referred to hereinbefore and the facts that came to light was there partnership or not. sharing of profits and contributing to losses were not the only elements in a partnership existence of agency was essential and whether there was a partnership or not is a mixed question of law and fact depending upon the varying circumstances in different cases. in the instant case judged by the aforesaid principles it is possible to hold that there was a partnership of which the appellant was a partner. the court of small causes considered these principles evaluated the evidence and held that there was in fact and in law a partnership. such a view was not an impossible one or a perverse one. if that was so there was nothing that could be clone about such a view within the ambit and scope of the power of section 29 2  of the rent act.

[Facts] this appeal is directed against the final judgment and order dated 03 10 2007 passed by the high court of judicature andhra pradesh at hyderabad in criminal appeal no 436 of 2001 whereby the high court dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant herein and confirmed the judgment dated 19 03 2001 passed by the special judge c b i cases visakhapatnam in c c no 2 of 1998. brief facts    a  the appellant accused was working as a head clerk in the traffic cadre section in the office of the senior divisional personnel officer south central railway vijayawada during the period from april 1992 to november 1997 the nature of duties of the appellant accused included dealing with and processing of the matters like promotions transfers seniority list roster list pay fixation on promotions retirements resignations etc of the personnel. one k rama rao the complainant who was examined as pw 1 was posted as yard points man grade  a  under station superintendent south central railway tanuku from december 1995 to june 1997 in june 1997 due to excess staff at tanuku. he was instructed to report at head quarters vijayawada and accordingly when he reported there he was asked to go back to tanuku. thereafter he went back to tanuku from where he was subsequently transferred to rajahmundry. thereafter pw 1 made a representation to his senior officer requesting him for posting at vijayawada cheerala vetapalam or tenali. later pw 1 was transferred to vijayawada. as the appellant accused was dealing with the transfers the complainant  pw 1  met him on 05 11 1997 at his office to pursue about the issuance of the said transfer order. the appellant accused asked him to come on 10 11 1997 when he met him on 10 11 1997 the appellant asked him to come on the next day as he was busy in pay fixation work. on 11 11 1997 again he went to the office of the appellant but he could not find him on his seat. again a day after i e on. 13 11 1997 when he met the appellant accused he informed him that his request for transfer has been processed and the order is ready and the same has been placed before the a p o for signature and asked him to come on the next day i e  on 14 11 1997 and demanded rs 200  for releasing the said office order. on the same day  pw 1  reported the matter in writing to the inspector of police central bureau of investigation  in short  the cbi  vijayawada. on 14 11 1997 a trap was laid by the cbi officials along with panchas and when the accused demanded and accepted a sum of rs 200  as illegal gratification he was caught red handed along with the money which was recovered from the right hand side pocket of his pant. on 15 11 1997 at 7 30 a m  an fir was registered by the inspector cbi visakhapatnam branch in crime no rc 20 a  97 vsp after recording the statements of the witnesses inspector of police cbi visakhapatnam filed charge sheet being no 2 98 ytr dated 29 04 1998 against the appellant accused for an offence punishable under sections 7 13 1  d  ii  read with s 13 2  of the prevention of corruption act 1988  hereinafter referred to as  the act   in the court of special judge for cbi cases at visakhapatnam. the special judge cbi by order dated 19 03 2001 convicted the appellant and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of six months and to pay a fine of rs 500  and in default to suffer simple imprisonment for one month for the offence punishable u s 7 of the act and one year rigorous imprisonment with a fine of rs 500  and in default to suffer simple imprisonment for one month for the offence punishable u ss 13 1  d   ii. read with s 13 2  of the act. g  against the said order the appellant accused filed criminal appeal no 436 of 2001 before the high court of andhra pradesh. the high court by impugned judgment dated 03 10 2007 dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant accused and confirmed the conviction passed by the trial court. hence the appellant accused has preferred this appeal by way of special leave petition before this court. heard mr. atm rangaramanujam learned senior counsel for the appellant and mr. harish chandra learned senior counsel for the respondent. notice only on quantum of sentence hearing on all aspects. on 28 01 2008 this court consisting of three hon ble judges issued notice in this matter confining to the quantum of sentence only. in pursuance of the same we permitted mr. rangaramanujam learned senior counsel for the appellant to address his arguments confining to quantum of sentence imposed on the appellant accused. as stated in the narration of facts the appellant was convicted u s 7 of the act for which he was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months and to pay a fine of rs 500   in default simple imprisonment for one month. he was also convicted for the offence under s 13 1  d  ii  read with s 13 2  of the act and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and fine of rs 500   in default simple imprisonment for one month. the trial court ordered that both the sentences of imprisonment shall run concurrently. the said conviction and sentence was affirmed by the high court. if we confine ourselves to the limited extent of notice dated 28 01 2008 we have to hear both sides only on the quantum of sentence.
[Ratio of the decision] b. c. d. e. f. permissibility. it is clear that the bench itself has clarified that they are not laying down the law that in spite of issuing notice confining to a particular aspect  in the case on hand   quantum of sentence   the parties are entitled to urge all points and re open the case as if they are free to do the same without any restriction. as a matter of fact the last sentence in para 18 makes it clear that in the facts and circumstances of that case they permitted the appellants to urge all points on merits. in the case on hand it is to be noted that on appreciation of oral and documentary evidence led in by the prosecution and the defence and on appreciation of entire materials the court of first instance i e the trial court convicted the appellant and sentenced him as mentioned above. the high court as an appellate court once again analysed all the material discussed the oral and documentary evidence and finding that the prosecution had proved the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt concurred with the conclusion arrived at by the trial court and dismissed the appeal of the appellant. inasmuch as both the courts have thoroughly discussed the oral and documentary evidence with reference to the charges leveled against the appellant and in view of the limited order dated 28 01 2008 by this court issuing notice confining to quantum of sentence only and even applying the analogy enunciated in yomeshbhai 2011 indlaw sc 370  supra  we feel that it is not a case of such nature that the appellant should be heard on all points consequently we reject the request of the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant. quantum of sentence. whether requires any reduction. it is not in dispute that the provisions of the prevention of corruption act 1988 alone are applicable since the incident occurred on 14 11 1997 i e subsequent to the act. s 7 of the act relates to public servant taking gratification other than legal remuneration in respect of an official act. if the said offence charge is proved the court has no other option but to impose sentence of imprisonment which shall be not less than six months but which may extend to five years and also liable to fine. other circumstances pleaded for reduction of sentence. we have gone through the facts in that case. it is true that even in the cited decision the appellant accused demanded only rs 250  and it was paid and accepted. finally the special judge framed charges for offence punishable under sections 7 12 13 1  d  read with s 13 2  of the act. the appellant therein was convicted for offence u s 7 2  of the act and appeal before the high court was also dismissed. thereafter the same was challenged before this court. this court after holding that the conclusion of the trial court and high court does not suffer from any infirmity considered the alternative submission which related to harshness of sentence. in that case taking note of the fact that the occurrence took place nearly seven years back and also of the fact that the appellant had suffered custody for more than six months considering all these aspects while maintaining the conviction this court reduced the sentence to the period already undergone. since the appellant therein was convicted only u s 7 and s 161 cr. pc  the minimum sentence being six months and of the fact that he had suffered custody for more than six months the course adopted by this court is perfectly in order and the same cannot be applied to the case on hand wherein the appellant had undergone only 52 days when the minimum sentence was six months u s 7 and one year u s 13. there is no dispute as regards the date of occurrence and the date of conviction passed by the trial court and affirmed by the high court. inasmuch as the conviction on both counts have been confirmed by this court and we are confined to sentence part alone and in view of the minimum sentence prescribed u ss 7 and 13 of the act we are of the view that though long delay may be a ground for reduction of sentence in other cases the same may not be applicable to the case on hand when the statute prescribes minimum sentence. accordingly we reject the said contention. though these grounds may be attractive in respect of other offences where minimum sentence is not prescribed in view of our reasonings in the earlier paras the same cannot be applied to the case on hand. after elaborately discussing almost all the case laws on this subject about jurisdiction of this court under article 142 summarised the same in the following words  therefore the law in this regard can be summarised to the effect that in exercise of the power u art 142 of the constitution this court generally does not pass an order in contravention of or ignoring the statutory provisions nor is the power exercised merely on sympathy. after saying so the court rejected the request of the parties to waive the statutory period of six months under the act. though the jurisdiction of this court u art 142 of the constitution of india is not in dispute we make it clear that exercise of such power would however depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. the high court in exercise of its jurisdiction u s 482 of the criminal procedure code and this court. u art 142 of the constitution would not ordinarily direct quashing of a case involving crime against the society particularly. when both the trial court as also the high court have found that the charge leveled against the appellant under the act has been made out and proved by the prosecution by placing acceptable evidence. we have perused those orders. the orders do not disclose any factual details and the relevant provisions under which the accused was charged convicted and minimum sentence if any as available in the act as well as the period already undergone. in the absence of such details we are unable to rely on those orders. from the analysis of the above decisions and the concerned provisions with which we are concerned the following principles emerge   a  when the court issues notice confining to particular aspect sentence arguments will be heard only to that extent unless some extraordinary circumstance material is shown to the court for arguing the matter on all aspects. long delay in disposal of appeal or any other factor may not be a ground for reduction of sentence particularly when the statute prescribes minimum sentence. in other cases where no such minimum sentence is prescribed it is open to the court to consider the delay and its effect and the ultimate decision. in a case of corruption by public servant quantum of amount is immaterial. ultimately it depends upon the conduct of the delinquent and the proof regarding demand and acceptance established by the prosecution. merely because the delinquent lost his job due to conviction under the act may not be a mitigating circumstance for reduction of sentence particularly when the statute prescribes minimum sentence. though art 142 of the constitution gives wider power to this court waiver of certain period as prescribed in the statute imposing lesser sentence than the minimum prescribed is not permissible. an order which this court can make in order to do complete justice between the parties must not only be consistent with the fundamental rights guaranteed by the constitution but also it cannot even be inconsistent with the substantive provisions of the relevant statute. in other words this court cannot altogether ignore the substantive provisions of a statute. g. in exercise of the power u art 142 of the constitution this court generally does not pass an order in contravention of or ignoring the statutory provisions nor is the power exercised merely on sympathy. h. the power u art 142 of the constitution is a constitutional power and not restricted by statutory enactments. however this court would not pass any order u art 142 which would amount to supplant the substantive law applicable or ignoring statutory provisions dealing with the subject. in other words acting under article 142 this court cannot pass an order or grant relief which is totally inconsistent or goes against the substantive or statutory enactments pertaining to the case. i. the powers u art 142 are not meant to be exercised when their exercise may come directly in conflict with what has been expressly provided for in statute dealing expressly with the subject. in the light of the above discussion we are unable to accept any of the contentions raised by the learned senior counsel for the appellant on the other hand we are in entire agreement with the conclusion arrived at by the trial judge as affirmed by the high court. consequently the appeal fails and the same is dismissed. since the appellant is on bail the bail bonds executed by him stand cancelled.

[Facts] the accused appellant has been held guily of of fences punishable under section 302 and section 376 2  f  of indian penal code. while the learned additional sessions judge made a reference to the high court for confirmation of death sentence under section 366 cr. p c   the appellant preferred an appeal putting in issue his conviction and sentence. the criminal reference and the criminal appeal were heard by a division bench of rajasthan high court. the two learned judges  constituting the division bench  differed in their opinion. in the opinion of one learned judge  the circumstantial evidence  on which rests the prosecution case  was not sufficient to record a finding of guilty against the appellant on any of the charges framed against him. in the opinion of the other learned judge  the prosecution evidence was sufficient to sustain the conviction  as recorded by the trial court  though  the case was not one of those  rarest of rare cases  as would warrant death sentence being awarded to the appellant. in view of the difference of opinion  the learned acting chief justice assigned the case for hearing by a third judge under section 392 of cr. p c. the third learned judge has  on an independent appreciation of evidence  recorded his own findings upholding the conviction of the accused on both the charges framed against him and thus agreeing with one of the two learned judges constituting the division bench in conclusion. kumari s  a young child aged about 5 years  was last seen at about 4 p m  on 18th march  1991 and thereafter she did not return home. at about 7 a m  on 19th march 1991  kishori lal  pw4 informed bd  pw2   the unfortunate father of s  that dead body of a girl was lying near mohalla basera on the outskirts of village kotputli. bd rushed to the place only to find that the dead body was of none else than his own daughter s  blood was oozing out from her mouth and private parts. a noose was also found around her neck. at 7 25 a m  on 19 3 1991 first information report was lodged by bd at police station kotputli. offence was registered under sections 302 and 376 ipc. the inves tigation commenced. the dead body was sent for post mortem examination which was performed at 9 30 a m   on the same day  by a medical board of three doctors. it was found that the victim was brutally ravished and thereafter killed. according to the medical opinion the probable cause of death of s was shock produced due to vaginal trauma and rupture of post  fornix along with asphyxia due to ligature around the neck. all injuries found on the person of the victim could be around 6 of 24 hours old prior to the time of post mortem examina tion. the vaginal injuries  clotted blood and injuries to post fornix were indica tive of rape having been committed on the victim. the clothes were removed from the dead body and seized. slides of vaginal swab were prepared for cyto chemical analysis for blood and seminal stains. the forensic science laboratory confirmed presence of group b blood on the clothes of deceased. the accused was arrested on 3 4 1991 on suspicion. on 4 4 1991  he was medically examined. there was no injury on his private parts or on any other part of body. the clothes on his person did not have any blood or seminal stains. he was a grown up male of 21 years and capable of performing sexual intercourse. on 5 4 1991  at about 12 30 p m   he gave an information exbt. p 23. and in confirmation of the information led the police to a dry well wherefrom an underwear and baniyan wrapped in a newspaper dated 18 3 1991 were recovered. the clothes so recovered were sent to forensic science laboratory. according to report exbt. p 27. human semen was detected on underwear. p 30 of forensic science laboratory human blood of group  b  was detected on the underwear. the accused was challaned and charge sheeted for the offences as already stated hereinabove. the prosecution examined 21 witnesses in all. it is not necessary here to extensively deal with the evidence adduced by the prosecution. suffice it to observe that there is no direct evidence connecting the accused with the offences charged. the prosecution case depends on circumstantial evidence. the pieces of circumstantial evidence which have been found proved and held as forging an incriminating chain against the accused are as under     i  last seen together   ii  abnormal conduct of the accused   iii  recovery of underwear and baniyan  which was found to be stained with semen and blood group  b  which is also the blood group of the deceased    iv  false plea of alibi  and  v  accused absconding since the date of offence.
[Ratio of the decision] we would proceed to examine each of the pieces of incriminating circumstantial evidence so as to find out if each one of the circumstantial evidence is proved individually and whether collectively it forges such a chain of incriminating circumstances as would fasten the guilt on the accused beyond by shadow of reasonable doubt. it is this testimony which has been relied upon by the trial court as also by the high court as the evidence of  last seen together. the witness is a child witness of very tender age and examined in the court almost a year after the date of the incident. we have very carefully read the statement of this witness. there is nothing in her statement to suggest that what she is narrating in the court is the story of a day soon before the date and time of the incident or the date on which dead body of s was found. to constitute evidence of last seen together  the evidence must definitely permit an inference being drawn that the victim and the accused were seen together at a point of time in close proximity with the time and date of the commission of crime. from the evi dence of shalu  pw7 such an inference cannot be drawn. goma  to whose shop the three girls had gone to buy balloon  has not been examined. there is something mysterious about the discovery of shalu as a witness to the incident. s has died. the third girl who was with s and shalu has not been examined either in the court or during investigation. the statement of shahu was recorded during investigation on 25 3 1991  i e  about six days after the date of incident. harish chand sharma  the investigating officer  was specifically asked how the name of this witness came to his knowledge during investigation. he gave an evasive answer saying that the fact that shalu was accompanying s  must have come in the staement of the witnesses. he was further asked to name the witness in whose statement shalu s reference was available but the investigation officer drew a blank and could not tell the name of the witness from whom any clue as to shalu was received by him. thus how and in what manner the investigating officer came to learn about shalu  pw7 so as to record her statement during investigation remains shrounded in mystery. the fact remains that the testimony of shalu  pw 7 aged 4 years  even if taken at its face value  does not constitute such a circumstance as to draw an incriminating inference against the accused and connect him with the crime. ii. abnormal conduct of accused kalu ram  pw5 stated that two or three days after the date of dead body of s having been found. he and santosh. pw9 had gone to see a movie in a cinema hall where the accused was employed as a gate keeper. there the accused had enquired from them as to what was the punishment awardable to an offender who was found to have been committed rape on a girl and killed her. the accused was told by the witness that the punishment could be 20 or even 40 years of imprisonment or imprisonment for life. thereafter the wit  nesses went to see movie in the cinema hall. during cross examination  kalu ram stated that the accused was his neighbour  previously known to him. on a pertinent question the witness stated that while making such a query there was no change in the facial expression of the accused  that is  he had remained normal. santosh  pw9  did not support the version of kalu ram and was declared hostile. without going into the question as to whether the statement of kalu ram  pw5 is to be believed or not in view of the same having not been supported by santosh pw9  let us assess the intrinsic value of such testimony as a piece of incriminating evidence. it appears that to begin with the death of s was a blind murder and the police was clue less about the likely offender. the police appears to have embarked upon a search akin to a combing operation and in that process several suspected characters were called and interrogated. harish chand sharma  pw21 stated that between 19th and 25th march  1991 the accused subhash was called at the police station several times for making enquiries. he did not remember and was therefore not in a position to tell how many number of times the accused subhash was called for interrogation or making enquiries. on seeing the case diary he stated that on 21 3 1991 the accused was definitely called twice on the same day though there is no mention of what enquiries were made from him. however  the accused was not detained and was sent back. any person even if innocent and not connected in any way with a gruesome crime which had recently occurred and was talk of the town  if called by police and interrogated as a suspect  would be scared and be apprehensive of the likelihood of his being implicated in the crime. placed in such situation if a villager  unaware of the law  happens to ask a person  who he feels knows the things better than what he himself does  as to what would be the period of incarceration to be suffered by any person for such an offence the impulse for inquiry may be outcome of a feeling of nervousness or mere inquisitiveness  such an enquiry is not necessarily suggestive of the working of a criminal mind. iii  recovery of underwear stained with blood and semen strangely enough the underwear and baniyan though discovered and seized  on an information given by the accused and on his pointing out apparently on a statement recorded under section 27 of the evidence act  have not been produced and exhibited in the court. what happened to these clothes is not known. there is not investigation directed towards finding out and no evidence worth its name collected and adduced in the court to show that the underwear and baniyan were of the accused. insofar as baniyan is concerned  it has no stains of any type on it and therefore its discovery and seizure is meaningless and irrelevant. so far as the underwear is concerned  the investigation suffers from another infirmity also. blood sam ple of the accused was not collected and therefore not grouped. no evidence is available to show as to what was the blood group of the accused and therefore the possibility of blood on the underwear being of the accused himself cannot be and is not ruled out. the number and extent of spread of stains is also not known. false plea of alibi. the high court has gone completely amiss in holding that a plea of alibi was taken by the accused and that was found to be false. the accused has not stated during his statement under section 313 cr. p c  and nowhere suggested during cross examination of prosecution witnesses that at the time of the incident he was at a place wherefrom he could not have reached the place of the offence on the date and at the time of its commission. although the dead body of the victim was found on the outskirts of the village  however  there is no material available on record to fix the place and the likely time at which rape was committed on s and then she was murdered. what is being treated as the plea of alibi by the trial court and the high court is this. the accused appears to have been engaged as a causal  not regular  gate keeper at  hira moti  a local talkies. the proprietor of the cinema hall was examined to state that on 18th and 19th march the accused had taken leave from his job and during those days he was not present on duty. this piece of evidence was put to the accused during his statement under section 313 cr. p c  and in reply he stated  galat hai   not correct. the purpose of asking questions during examination under section 313 cr. p c  is to afford the accused personally an opportunity of explaining any incriminating circumstance so appearing in evidence against him. the accused may or may not avail the opportunity for offering his explanation. the accused did not avail the opportunity and stood short by simply stating that the statement of cinema owner was not correct. literal meaning of alibi is  elsewhere. in law this term is used to express that defence in a criminal prosecution  where the party accused  in order to prove that he could not have committed the crime charged against him  offers evidence that he was in a different place at that time. the plea taken should be capable of meaning that having regard to the time and place when and where he is alleged to have committed the offence  he could not have been present. the plea of alibi postulates the physical impossibility of the presence of the accused at the scene of offence by reason of his presence at another place. see law lexicon  p  ramnath iyer  second edition  p 87. denial by an accused of an assertion made by his employer that the accused was on leave of absence from duty on the date of offence does not  by any stretch of reasoning or logic  amount to pleading alibi. we are clearly of the opinion that the accused appellant has not taken a plea of alibi and therefore the question of finding it false  and then drawing an inference adverse to him  does not arise at all. v  absconding of the accused was the accused absconding at all. grave injustice has been done to the accused by holding it as a fact that the accused was absconding after the date of the incident and then treating the so called absconding as a piece of incrimi nating circumstantial evidence against the accused. according to harish chand sharma  the accused was arrested on 3 4 1991  vide exbt. p 21  at behror  which is a place situated at a distance of about 30 35 kms. from village kotputli where the incident had taken place. though the accused is alleged to have been arrested at behror but the memo of arrest was not prepared at behror  it was prepared at village kotputli. the memo of arrest does not state the arrest of accused having been made at behror. if the accused was arrested at behror there is no reason why the memo of arrest should not have been prepared at village behror. at least this fact should have been mentioned in the memo of arrest even if the same was prepared at village kotputli. secondly  harish chand sharma himself states that between 19 3 1991 and 25 3 1991 the ac cused was called several times at the police station and on 21 3 1991 itself he was called twice in a day. thus  he was always available to the police. kalu ram  pw5  accompanied by a friend santosh  pw9  had gone to see a movie in cinema talkies heera moti two days after the date of the incident and there the accused was present on his duty. there is no evidence adduced by the prosecution to hold that soon after the date of the offence the accused was found missing from his residence or the place of his employment and was not available  though searched  at the place or places where normally he ought to have been. hence  it could not have been held that the accused was absconding. conclusion. thus  none of the pieces of evidence relied on as incriminating  by the trial court and the high court  can be treated as incriminating pieces of circumstantial evidence against the accused. though the offence is gruesome and revolts the human conscience but an accused can be convicted only on legal evidence and if only a chain of circumstantial evidence has been so forged as to rule out the possibility of any other reasonable hypothesis excepting the guilt of the accused. in shankarlal gyarasilal dixit s case 1980 indlaw sc 47  supra   this court cautioned    human nature is too willing  when faced with brutal crimes  to spin stories out of strong suspicions. this court has held time and again that between may be true and must be true there is a long distance to travel which must be covered by clear  cogent and unimpeachable evidence by the prosecu tion before an accused is condemned a convict. the trial court and the high court have proceeded on an assumption of availability of five pieces forging links in the chain of circumstantial evi dence out of which we have found  as stated hereinabove  four of the alleged circumstances not to be pieces of incriminating circumstantial evidence at all. we are left with circumstance no. 3 only  i e   recovery of underwear and baniyan stained with semen and human blood group  b   which alone  in the fact and circumstances of the case discussed hereinabove cannot form basis of conviction of the accused appellant for the offence charged. before parting with the case we would like to place on record  an observation of ours  touching an aspect of the case. there are clueless crimes committed. the factum of a cognizable crime having been committed is known but neither the identity of the accused is disclosed nor is there any indication available of the witnesses who would be able to furnish useful and relevant evidence. such offences put to test the wits of an investigating officer. a vigilant investigating officer  well versed with the techniques of the job  is in a position to collect the threads of evidence finding out the path which leads to the culprit. the ends  which the administration of cirminal justice serves  are not achieved merely by catching hold of the culprit. the accusation has to be proved to hilt in a court of law. the evidence of investigating officer given in the court should have a rhythm explaining step by step how the investigation proceeded leading to detection of the offender and collection of evidence against him. this is necessary to exclude the likelihood of any innocent having been picked up and branded as culprit and then the gravity of the offence arousing human sympathy persuading the mind to be carried away by doubtful or dubious circumstances treating them as of  beyond doubt  evidentiary value.

[Facts] this appeal is preferred against the judgment dated 19 8 2011 passed by the high court of punjab and haryana in criminal appeal no 181 sb of 2000  whereby the high court partly allowed the appeal filed by the appellants thereby confirming the conviction of the appellants with certain modifications. briefly stated  case of the prosecution is that on the fateful day i e  18 11 1994  at about 8 00 a m  in the morning the complainant jagdish  pw 5  along with his two sons namely sukhbir and mange ram  pw 6  were busy in cutting pullas  reeds  from the dola of their field. at that time  jage ram  a 1  and his sons rajbir singh. raju  a 2   rakesh  a 3  and madan  a 4  armed with jaily  pharsi and lathis respectively  entered the land where the complainant was working with his sons and asked them not to cut the pullas as it was jointly held by both the parties. wordy altercations ensued between the parties and jage ram insisted that he would take away the entire pullas. in the fight  the accused persons started inflicting injuries to the complainant  and his sons rajbir. raju  a 2  gave a pharsi blow on the head of sukhbir  jage ram  a 1  caused injury to jagdish  pw 5  with two jaily blows. additionally  madan and rakesh attacked the complainant with lathi blows on shoulder and left elbow respectively and caused several other injuries to the complainant party. jagdish and his injured sons raised alarm  hearing which rajesh and usha came to rescue them and on seeing them  the accused persons fled away. the injured witnesses were taken to the primary health centre  taoru where dr  pardeep kumar  medical officer  medically examined the injured persons. injured sukhbir was vomiting in the hospital and later on he was referred to general hospital  gurgaon as his condition deteriorated. a ct scan disclosed that large extra dural haematoma was found in the frontal region with mass effect and sukhbir needed urgent surgery and he was operated upon and the large extra dural haematoma was removed. dr  pardeep kumar  pw 2  also examined the other injured persons  pw 5 jagdish and pw. 6  mange ram. statement of jagdish was recorded  based on which f i r  was registered at police station taoru  gurgaon under sections 323  324  325 and 307 read with s  34 ipc. pw 8 ramesh kumar  asi  had taken up the investigation. he examined the witnesses and after completion of investigation  challan was filed under sections 307  325  324 read with s  34 ipc. in the trial court  prosecution examined nine witnesses including jagdish pw5  mange ram pw6 and dr  prem kumar pw2 and dr  hiiol kanti pal pw9. neuro surgeon  pw8 investigating officer and other witnesses. the accused were examined u s. 313 cr. p c  about the incriminating evidence and circumstances. first accused jage ram pleaded that on the date of occurrence complainant party jagdish and his sons mange ram and sukhbir forcibly trespassed into the land belonging to the accused and attempted to forcibly cut the pullas. jagdish further claims that he along with rakesh caused injuries to the complainant party in exercise of right of private defence of property. he has denied that rajesh and usha had seen the incident. raju  a 2  and madan  a 3  stated that they were not present on the spot and they have been falsely implicated. rakesh  a 4  adopted the stand of his father jage ram. dr  pardeep kumar pw 2  who examined sukhbir found during his medico legal examination a lacerated wound in the middle of the top of the skull. injured sukhkbir was found vomiting in the hospital and he was examined by a neuro surgeon dr  hilol kanti pal  pw 9  of safdarjung hospital  delhi on 19 11 1994  i e  the day after the incident. pw 9 has stated that sukhbir was unconscious since 2 00 p m  on 18 11 1994 and was deeply comatose with irregularity of pupils and a laceration was diagnosed on the right front parietal region. further  pw 9 has stated that during the ct scan  it was revealed that a large extra dural haemotoma was present in the frontal region with mass effect and to avoid further deterioration of his condition  he was operated upon by frontal trephine craniopmy an haemotoma measuring about 125 ml was evacuated. pw 9. stated that had not the operation been conducted on sukhbir and had not the extra dural haemotoma removed by operation urgently  the head injury caused to sukhbir would have caused his death. as noted by the high court  it is thus brought on evidence that had not surgical assistance been given to sukhbir  he would have definitely died.
[Ratio of the decision] 307 ipc. we have carefully considered the rival contentions and gone through the impugned judgment and perused the materials on record. as it emerges from the evidence  complainant jagdish  pw 5  and his two sons sukhbir and mange ram were cutting pullas. the accused party went there and asked them not to cut the pullas. in the wordy altercation  second accused rajbir. raju gave pharsi blows on the head of sukhbir. pws 5   6 have clearly spoken about the overt act of the accused that a 1 jage ram attacked and caused injury to pw 5 jagdish with jaily blows and that second accused rajbir. raju attacked on the head of sukhbir with pharsi. they have also stated that madan and rakesh caused injuries to pw5 jagdish with lathi on shoulder and left elbow respectively. pw. 2  dr  pardeep kumar in his evidence stated that he has examined pws 5 and 6 and noted the injuries on the body of pws 5 and 6 and issued wound certificates. evidence of pws 5 and 6 is amply corroborated by medical evidence. pws 5 and 6 being injured witnesses  their evidence is entitled to great weight. cogent and convincing grounds are required to discard the evidence of injured witnesses. in the light of the fact that pws 5 and 6 were injured witnesses  courts below tested their evidence for its credibility and recorded concurrent findings that pws 5 and 6 are trustworthy witnesses. we find no reason to take a different view. for the purpose of conviction u s. 307 ipc  prosecution has to establish  i  the intention to commit murder and  ii  the act done by the accused. the burden is on the prosecution that accused had attempted to commit the murder of the prosecution witness. whether the accused person intended to commit murder of another person would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. to justify a conviction u s. 307 ipc  it is not essential that fatal injury capable of causing death should have been caused. although the nature of injury actually caused may be of assistance in coming to a finding as to the intention of the accused  such intention may also be adduced from other circumstances. the intention of the accused is to be gathered from the circumstances like the nature of the weapon used  words used by the accused at the time of the incident  motive of the accused  parts of the body where the injury was caused and the nature of injury and severity of the blows given etc. having regard to the weapon used for causing the head injuries to sukhbir  nature of injures  situs of the injury and the severity of the blows  courts below recorded concurrent findings convicting the 2nd appellant u s. in our considered view  the conviction of the second appellant rajbir. 307 ipc is unassailable. for the conviction u s. 307 ipc  courts below imposed upon the 2nd appellant rigorous imprisonment of five years  while imposing punishment  courts have an obligation to award appropriate punishment. question of awarding sentence is a matter of discretion and the same has to be exercised by the courts taking into consideration all the relevant circumstances. in the light of the above  considering the case in hand  the occurrence was of the year 1994 when the complainant party was cutting pullas  the accused asked them not to cut the pullas which resulted in the wordy altercation. in the heat of passion  the accused have caused injuries to the complainant party. raju is in custody. he surrendered on 5 1 2012 and is stated to be in custody since then  for more than three years. having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case  in our considered view  the period of sentence of five years may be reduced to three years apart from directing the second appellant rajbir. raju to pay substantial compensation to injured sukhbir. as noticed above  injured sukhbir sustained grievous head injuries and was deeply comatose and was in a state of shock and trauma. having regard to the nature of injuries sustained by sukhbir and the period of treatment and other circumstances  we are of the view that  it would be appropriate to direct second appellant  accused rajbir. raju to pay rs 7 50 000   as compensation to the injured sukhbir. when the matter came up for hearing on 14 10 2014  learned counsel for the appellants informed the court that he had offered rs 5 00 000   by way of demand draft towards compensation to the injured sukhbir in the presence of the sarpanch of the village which he has refused to receive the same. the said amount of rs 5 00 000   is now kept in fixed deposit in the registry of this court. having regard to the fact that the occurrence was of the year 1994  considering the other facts and circumstances of the case  the sentence of imprisonment imposed on jage ram  a 1   madan  a 3  and rakesh  a 4  is reduced to the period already undergone by them.

[Facts] this appeal by special leave arises out of a judgment and order dated 1st march 2005. rendered by the high court of judicature at bombay whereby the learned single judge has set aside the order passed by the arbitral tribunal holding that they did not have jurisdiction to entertain and try the claim and counter claim made by the parties. in order to appreciate the issue requiring determination a few relevant facts may be stated. the appellant m s. bharat petroleum corporation limited is a government of india undertaking under the administrative control of the ministry of petroleum   natural gas and is engaged in refining distributing and selling of petroleum products all over the country. the respondent m s. great eastern shipping company limited is engaged in the business of shipping and allied activities and owns a fleet of tanker vessels for charter including the vessel known as jag praja. an agreement called the time charter party in legal parlance was entered into between the appellant and the respondent on 6th may 1997 for letting on hire vessels for a period of two years from 22nd september 1996 to 30th june 1997 and from 1st july 1997 to 30th june 1998 on the terms and conditions set out in the said agreement. however before the charter party was to come to an end on 29th june 1998 the indian oil corporation limited  for short ioc   acting as agent of the appellant issued a fax to various ship owners including the respondent herein requesting them to extend the validity of the charter party agreement dated 6th may 1997 beyond 30th june 1998 for a period of one month from 1st july 1998 with option for two further extensions of 15 days each. the respondent agreed to the said proposal. accordingly on 29th june 1998 an addendum was signed between the parties whereby the validity period of charter party was extended for one month with an option for two further extensions for a period of 15 days each. the terms and conditions  exceptions and exemptions contained in the charter party dated 6th may 1997 remained unaltered. the parties are ad idem that the charter party dated 6th may 1997 was extended till 31st august 1998. it appears that since charter party dated 6th may 1997 was coming to an end on 31st august 1998 the oil companies sought permission of the oil co ordination committee a wing of the ministry of petroleum and natural gas for further extension of the charter party. however the oil coordination committee by their fax message dated 26th august 1998 declined the request of the oil companies including the appellant for further extension of charter party beyond 31st august 1998 the said fax message was an internal communication between the oil coordination committee and the oil companies. thereafter in september 1998 the ioc for and on behalf of the oil industry floated a fresh tender for carriage of petroleum products along the indian coast on time charter basis for a period of one year commencing from 1st september 1998 to 31st august 1999 on the terms and conditions set out in the tender document. in response to the said tender the respondent and other vessel owners submitted their bids. it seems that being aggrieved of the decision of the ioc to invite revised price bids after opening of the sealed tenders one of the bidders filed a writ petition in the bombay high court questioning the said decision. the appellant intervened in the said matter. it appears that pending finalization of a new charter party for the period commencing 1st september 1998 certain meetings took place between the oil companies and the ship owners including the respondent herein. on 12th october 1998 the respondent informed the ioc that if all its nine vessels mentioned in the letter are used at a fair and reasonable rate for one year from 1st september 1998 to 31st august 1999 for which the tender had been floated they were agreeable to apply the new agreed rates for use of the said nine vessels from 1st july 1998 on 31st october 1998. the ioc faxed to the respondent relevant portion of the message received by them from oil co ordination committee extending the period of usage of the existing coastal tanker fleet for the month of october 1998 at 80  charter hire rates prevailing till 30th june 1998 on provisional basis subject to adjustment of provisional charter hire with retrospective date from 1st september 1998 against the revised charter hire to be finalised by the oil industry in response to the tender floated by ioc on 1st september 1998 respondent s consent was asked for. the respondent responded immediately vide their letter dated 5th november 1998 agreeing in principle that revised charter hire rates as and when finalized in response to tender floated by the ioc on 1st september 1998 would be applicable to the vessels which are selected under the tender retrospectively from 1st september 1998 it was pointed out that the vessels which are not chartered under the tender floated would be at a disadvantage. it was clearly stated that since the tender was not finalized the owners will be guided by the existing terms and conditions. some other objections not relevant at this stage were also indicated. as such all said and done oil co ordination committee s proposal was not accepted. nevertheless some suggestions to resolve the controversy were given. thus the proposal by the oil co ordination committee was not accepted by the respondent. in the alternative it was suggested by the respondent that the charter period be extended by six months on the existing terms and conditions at a mutually discussed time charter rate. admittedly the vessels continued to be chartered by the appellant beyond the date of this letter. thereafter for almost two months there was no communication between the parties. it was only on 31st december 1998 when the ioc issued a fax to the respondent enclosing draft letter regarding charter party agreement to be signed between the charterers and owners  with minor modification if necessary  requesting the respondent to sign as per proposal by the 4th january 1999 on which date the respondent expressed its disinclination stating in reply fax that as per usual practice pending finalization of new charter the existing terms and conditions of the charter party continue to apply. finally it was suggested that   we therefore suggest that we sign an agreement with you for the period from 1st september 1998 until the matter is finally decided by you under the tender on the existing terms and conditions with the charter hire being provisionally paid on an ad hoc basis at 90  of the rate which was prevailing under the existing charter party. kindly confirm in order to draw up a suitable agreement accordingly. emphasis supplied. vide letter of even date i e 4th january 1999 the appellant suggested to the respondent that in the absence of a formal charter party with effect from 1st september 1998 a provisional arrangement for a period of four months effective from 1st september 1998 with an option for extension of one month may be mutually agreed to by payment at the rate of 80  on charter hire prevailing on 30th june 1998 as ad hoc hire. the respondent was asked to convey their acceptance to the said suggestion. it appears that the respondent did not respond to the said suggestion by the appellant but all the same its vessel continued to be on charter with the appellant. the writ petition was ultimately disposed of on 20th august 1999 it was only after a gap of about seven months that on 15th march 2000 the ioc informed the respondent about the evaluation of the tenders in terms of the order passed by the high court. charter hire rate worked out by the committee for vessel jag praja for the period from 1st september 1998 to 31st august 1999 was communicated to the respondent. in response the respondent while expressing their disappointment with the rate but purportedly in view of their long business relations with the appellant conveyed their acceptance of the proposed rate in respect of each of the vessels named in separate letters all dated 1st. may 2000 with the expectation that their outstanding balance of the hire shall be paid to them at the earliest. however the respondent did not convey their acceptance of the charter hire rates for two vessels viz. jag praja and jag prayog. it appears that the respondent wrote various letters to the appellant for upward revision of the rate in respect of these two vessels but seemingly their request was ultimately turned down on 2nd november 2000 on receipt of which the respondent slammed a legal notice dated 6th november 2000 on the appellant inter alia requesting them to revise the rates on the basis of mutual discussions and settle the accounts. having failed to receive any reply to the said notice by another legal notice dated 1st december 2000 the respondent called upon the appellant to pay balance amount of rs 43 947 517  to them as charter hire in respect of vessel jag praja for the period from 1st september 1998 to 31st august 1999 within 15 days from date of receipt of the said notice or treat it as an arbitration notice. the name of the arbitrator was also communicated to the appellant. it seems that pursuant to the said notice and some subsequent correspondence exchanged between the parties an arbitral tribunal was constituted. claims and counter claims were filed before the arbitral tribunal. on the basis of the pleadings of the parties the arbitral tribunal framed as many as eight issues. however arguments were heard only on the following three issues. vide order dated 12th. may 2003 the arbitral tribunal came to the conclusion that the appellant having invoked the arbitration clause contained in charter party agreement dated 6th may 1997 which was valid upto 31st august 1998. and as the dispute between the parties related to the period subsequent to 31st. august 1998 they had no jurisdiction to decide the reference. the learned tribunal found issue no 2 in the negative and issue no 5 in the affirmative. according to the tribunal on and after 1st september 1998 charter party agreement dated 6th may 1997 was superseded by a fresh agreement and a term of the agreement was that the charter hire rate would be determined by the oil co ordination committee of the ioc in nutshell the tribunal was of the view that with the performance original charter party dated 6th may 1997 got extinguished. the respondent challenged the said award before the high court. by the impugned order the learned single judge has set aside the said award inter alia holding that arbitral tribunal has the jurisdiction to adjudicate the disputes between the parties as the vessel continued to be hired by the appellant for the period subsequent to 31st august 1998 on the same terms and conditions as were contained in the charter party dated 6th may 1997 only subject to the revision or modification of the rate of hire to be determined by the oil co ordination committee. the learned judge also felt that the tribunal had erred in totally excluding from its consideration cls 23 and 4 1 of the charter party dated 6th may 1997 whereunder the charter party was to come to an end on re delivery of the vessel. admittedly after 31st august 1998 re delivery of vessel did not take place and therefore in terms of clause 23 the vessel continued to be hired on the same terms and conditions except the term as to the hire charges on which there was disagreement between the parties. it was thus held that the charter party dated 6th may 1997 did not come to an end by efflux of time and it was extended by the parties on the same terms and conditions except the rate of hire.
[Ratio of the decision] issue no 1  whether the hon ble arbitral tribunal has no jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute between the claimant and the respondent for the period september 1998 to august 1999. in respect of the vessel jag praja for the reasons stated in para 1 of the written statement. issue no 2  whether there is any common practice that if the vessel is not re delivered at the end of the period mentioned in the time charter the vessel would be governed by the charter party under which originally it was chartered. issue. no 5  whether the time charter party dated 6th. may 1997 came to an end by efflux of time on 30th august 1998. correctness of this order of the high court is questioned in this appeal. thus the short question for determination is whether on the expiry of the extended period of charter hire on 31st august 1998 charter party dated 6th may 1997 came to an end and the arbitration agreement between the parties perished with it. before we proceed to examine the rival stands we may note at the outset that neither the arbitral tribunal nor the high court have gone into the question whether the claim made by the respondent would otherwise fall within the ambit of the arbitration clause in the charter party or not. what is in dispute is whether the arbitration agreement between the parties had got extinguished after 31st august 1998 i e the date of expiry of the extended period of the charter party. therefore we refrain from expressing any opinion on the scope and ambit of the arbitration clause though prime facie it appears to be quite widely worded. it is no doubt true that the general rule is that an offer is not accepted by mere silence on the part of the offerree yet it does not mean that an acceptance always has to be given in so many words. under certain circumstances offerree s silence coupled with his conduct which takes the form of a positive act may constitute an acceptance an agreement sub silentio. therefore the terms of a contract between the parties can be proved not only by their words but also by their conduct. in our view the principle of sub silentio is clearly attracted in the present case. as noted above after the extended period of charter party dated 6th may 1997 had come to an end on 31st august 1998. and the bids received pursuant to fresh invitation were pending finalization vide their letter dated 12th. october 1998 the respondent had informed the appellant that they were agreeable to apply new rates for use of the vessel from 1st july 1998 provided all the nine vessels are used. however on 31st october 1998 the appellant faxed ioc s message informing them of the extension of the existing coastal tanker fleet for the month of october 1998 at reduced rates viz 80  of the charter party rates prevailing till 30th august 1998 on receipt of the said letter the respondent vide their letter dated 5th november 1998 protested against the revision of the rates for the vessel not being considered under the new bid and stated in unequivocal terms that it was not possible for them to accept the proposal of the oil co ordination committee communicated to them vide letter dated 12th. october 1998 yet again while responding to appellant s fax dated 31st december 1998 whereby the respondent was required to sign a provisional charter party by 4th january 1999 vide their letter dated 4th january 1999 the respondent pointed out to the appellant that usual practice is that pending finalization of the new charter the existing terms and conditions of the charter party continue to apply and therefore they were willing to sign the agreement as contemplated by the appellant based on the existing terms and conditions. it was suggested that an agreement may be signed between them for the period from 1st september 1998 until the matter was finally decided by the appellant under the tender on the existing terms and conditions with the charter hire being provisionally paid on ad hoc basis at 90  of the rate which was prevailing under the existing charter party. as noted hereinabove there was no response by the appellant to respondent s letter dated 4th january 1999 though it appears that vide their letter of even date the appellant did suggest to the respondent that as a token of formal agreement the said letter may be jointly signed by the charterers and the vessel owners. admittedly no such agreement was signed between the parties. indubitably there was no further exchange of correspondence between the parties during the year. nevertheless the appellant continued to use the vessel on hire with them under the time charter dated 6th may 1997 the conduct of the parties as evidenced in the said correspondence and in particular appellant s silence on respondent s letters dated 5th november 1998 and 4th. january 1999 coupled with the fact that they continued to use the vessel manifestly goes to show that except for the charter rate there was no other dispute between the parties. they accepted the stand of the respondent sub silentio and thus continued to bind themselves by other terms and conditions contained in the charter party dated 6th may 1997 which obviously included the arbitration clause. we may examine the issue from another angle based on respondent s stand that charter party dated 6th may 1997 continues to be in vogue till the chartered vessel is re delivered. final voyage should the vessel be on her voyage towards the port of redelivery at the time of payment of hire is due payment of hire shall be made for such length of time as owners and charterers may agree upon as being estimated time necessary to complete the voyage less any disbursements made or expected to be made or expenses incurred or expected to be incurred by charterers for owners account and less the estimated amount of bunker fuel remaining at the termination of the voyage and when the vessel is redelivered any overpayment shall be refunded by the owners or underpayment paid by charterers. notwithstanding the provisions of cl 4 hereof should the vessel be upon voyage at the expiry of the period of this charter charterers shall have the use of vessel at the same rate and conditions for such extended time as may be necessary for the completion of the round voyage on which she is engaged and her return to a port of redelivery as provided by the charter. on a conjoint reading of the said clauses it is plain that the appellant was under an obligation to re deliver the vessel as per the procedure contemplated in the afore noted clauses. indisputably the vessel in question had not been re delivered at least during the relevant period and the appellant continued to use the vessel beyond 31st august 1998 having failed to re deliver the vessel in terms of cl 4 1 of the charter party the appellant cannot plead that the charter party had been fully worked out. it is clear from the pleadings and issue no 2 framed by the arbitral tribunal that it was respondent s consistent stand that since the hired vessel had not been re delivered at the end of the time charter party the vessel would be governed by the terms and conditions in the charter party dated 6th may 1997. however the arbitral tribunal answered the said issue against the respondent. it appears to us that even the question in regard to the effect and consequences of non delivery of the vessel in terms of the cl 4 1 and 23 would by itself be a dispute arising under the said charter party  with. respect. the learned arbitral tribunal overlooked this aspect of the matter. having come to the conclusion that an arbitration agreement existed between the parties the question which remains to be considered is whether the disputes between the parties should be referred to the same arbitral tribunal which had come to the conclusion that in the absence of any arbitration agreement it did not have jurisdiction to entertain and try the claims and counter claims. resultantly the appeal being devoid of any merit is liable to be dismissed which we do leaving the parties to bear their own costs.

[Facts] for the sake of convenience we refer to the facts mentioned in civil appeal no of 2008  arising out of s l p  c  no 15729 of 2008  filed by j mitra   co. pvt ltd. this matter is a classic illustration of the confusion which has emerged on account of the postponement of in part commencement of patents  amendment  act 2005. quite often the commencement of an act is postponed to some specified future date or to such date as the appropriate government may by notification in the official gazette appoint. provision is also at times made for appointment of different dates for coming into force of different parts of the same act. this is what has exactly happened in this case resulting into utter confusion with regard to pending fao no 293 06 filed by respondent no 3 in the high court u s 116 of the indian patents. act 1970 as amended by the patents  amendment  act 1999 w e f 26 3 99. span diagnostics limited respondent no 3 herein is a public limited company established in 1972 to indigenously develop and manufacture a comprehensive range of ready made diagnostic reagents made by clinical pathology laboratories. on 14 6 2000 j mitra   company pvt. ltd  3 appellant herein filed its application for grant of patent. after scrutiny the said application stood notified by the patent office on 20 11 2004. thus proceedings commenced before the controller of patents in the year 2000 when the appellant herein sought a patent of their device which was opposed by respondent no 3 in the year 2000 by then the patents  amendment  act 1999 had amended the patents act 1970 w e f 26 3 99 s 25 of the patents act 1970 as amended by patents  amendment  act 1999 dealt with opposition to a patent vides s 25 at that time appeals against decisions made by the controller pertaining to  pre grant oppositions  under s 25 were maintainable before the high court u s 116 2  of the indian patents act 1970. in 2002 the legislature desired an amendment to the law and intended to create an appellate forum to hear appeals against orders passed by the controller consequently patents  amendment. act 2002 was promulgated on 25 6 2002 however it was not brought into force immediately. it may be noted that in the said amendment act 2002 no provision was made pertaining to  post grant opposition  that provision came to be made only under the patents  amendment  act 2005 which was promulgated on 4 4 2005 w e f 1 1 2005. the provisions of the said amendment act 2002 however were not simultaneously brought into force. suffice it to note that ss 116 and 117a were not brought into force. however s 25 was brought into force vide notification dated 20 5 2003 even as on 20 5 2003 vide s 25 only one right to oppose a patent at the pre grant stage was available and appeal against an order passed by the earlier lay before the high court under the then existing s 116 of the patents. act 1970 for the reason that the amended ss 116 and 117a were not brought into force. without giving effect to the amendments to ss 116 and 117a suggested by s 47 of the patents  amendment. act 2002 on 4 4 2005. the legislature enacted the patents  amendment  act 2005 even here not all provisions were simultaneously brought into force. only certain sections of the patents  amendment  act 2005 were brought into force.
[Ratio of the decision] in short by the patents  amendment  act 2005 for the first time a dichotomy was introduced in the patent law between  opposition to the pre grant  and  opposition to the post grant of patent  this was the major structural change in the patent law. similarly under the patents  amendment  act 2005 appeal was restricted to the post grant opposition orders and that appeal lay before the appellate board and not to the high court. here also s 25 of the patents act 1970 as amended by patents  amendment  act 2005. which refers to  pre grant opposition  and  post grant opposition   was brought into force on and from 1 1 2005 whereas amended section 117a by which appeal was provided for against post grant opposition order was not brought into force till 2 4 2007 one more aspect needs to be mentioned. as stated vide patents  amendment. act 2005 a dichotomy was brought in between pre grant and post grant opposition orders. w e f 1 1 2005 but when it came to filing of first appeal for some unknown reasons the amended section 117a  which provided for only one statutory appeal and that too against post grant orders passed by the controller  was not brought into force. the result is that although the legislature intended to provide for only one statutory appeal to the appellate board by reason of s 61 of the patents  amendment  act 2005 not being brought into force till 2 4 07 a strange situation developed. the legislature intended to provide for only one statutory appeal to the appellate board but by not bringing s 61 into force till 2 4 07 appeals filed during the interregnum as in this case became vulnerable and liable to be dismissed as misconceived as is contended by the appellant. this is the controversy which needs to be resolved in this case. on 19 10 2006 when fao no 293 06 was filed in the high court chapter xix of the parent act as amended vide patents  amendment. act 1999 continued to be in operation notwithstanding the enactment of the patents. amendment  act 2002 and the patents  amendment. act 2005 as the amended ss 116 and 117a were brought into force only vide notification dated 2 4 07 one more point needs to be noted. on reading amended section 117g it becomes clear that all appeals against any order or decision of the controller had to be transferred to the appellate board from such date as may be notified by the central government in the official gazette. this amended section 117g was also brought into force vide notification dated 3 4 2007 under notes on clauses attached to the statement of objects and reasons it has been clarified vide cl 62. that amended s 117 g is consequential to the enforcement of the jurisdiction of the appellate board u s 64 which results to revocation of patent. vide cl 47 of notes on clauses attached to the statement of objects and reasons it has been clarified that s 64 is also amended vide patents  amendment  act 2005 to confer wider jurisdiction on the appellate board in matters of revocation of patent therefore amended section 117g which is brought into force only from 3 4 2007 dealt with transfer of pending proceedings from the high court to the appellate board. the question which arises for determination in this batch of civil appeals is   whether fao no 292 06 and fao no 293 06 filed by respondent no 3 herein in the high court were liable to be dismissed. according to the appellant with the change in s 25 brought about by patents  amendment  act 2005 a dichotomy was introduced in the patents act 1970 according to the appellant that dichotomy was between  pre grant opposition  and  post grant opposition. however on that date appeal against pre grant opposition order was maintainable under section 116 to the high court and therefore there is no merit in the argument advanced on behalf of the appellant that the first appeal filed by respondent no 3 was misconceived  that it is true that s 25 got restructured w e f 1 1 2005 however such restructuring did not obliterate the first appeal filed by respondent no 3 on 19 10 2006. as stated above quite often the commencement of an act is postponed to some specific future date or to such date as the appropriate government may by notification in the official gazette appoint. at times provision is made for appointment of different dates for coming into force of different parts of the same act. an act cannot be said to commence or to be in force unless it is brought into operation by legislative enactment or by the exercise of authority by a delegate empowered to bring it into operation. applying the above tests to the present case we find that by patents  amendment  act 2005 for the first time a dichotomy was inserted in the patent law by providing vide s 25 1  for  opposition to pre grant  and vide s 25  2  for  opposition to post grant  of patent. by reason of patents  amendment  act 2005 the kind of opposition available under the said 1970 act is different from what existed earlier. previously there was no  post grant opposition  previously the only provision of challenge by an interested party was a  pre grant  challenge under s 25  1  as it then stood. therefore the courts had evolved the  rule of caution  as the patent had not faced any challenge at the hands of interested parties. there is however a radical shift due to incorporation of s 25 2  where an interested party is granted the right to challenge the patent after its grant. the ground of challenge under s 25 1  is identical to s 25 2  of the said 1970 act. however s 25 1  is wider than s 25 2  as the latter is available only to a  person aggrieved  the main difference between s 25 1  and s 25 2  as brought about by patents  amendment. act 2005 is that even after a patent is granted  post grant opposition  can be filed under s 25  2  for a period of one year. the reason is obvious. in relation to patents that are of recent origin a higher scrutiny is necessary. this is the main rationale underlying s 25 2  of the said 1970 act. therefore the legislature intended an appeal under section 117a 2  to the appellate board from any decision order or direction of the controller inter alia under s 25 4   which refers to the power of the controller to maintain amend or revoke the patent. in the present case the legislature intended to provide for two types of scrutiny followed by one statutory appeal to the appellate board against  post grant proceedings  the legislature intended to have a dichotomy between  pre grant opposition  and  post grant opposition  however the legislature intended that there shall be only one statutory appeal against grant of patent. the legislature intended to obliterate appeal from  pre grant proceedings  which existed earlier. however it was left to the executive to bring the enacted law into force vide notification. for some unknown reasons the amended ss 116 and 117a 2  were not brought into force till 2 4 07 whereas the concept of  pre grant  and  post grant  oppositions were brought into force w e f 1 1 2005 this is where the legislative intent got defeated during the interregnum. it is during this interregnum that respondent no 3 filed its fao no 293 06 in the high court under section 116 as. it stood on 19 10 06 under the patents  amendment  act 1999 on that date the amended section 117a suggested by patents  amendment  act 2005 was not brought into force. on 19 10 06 the old law prevailed under which an appeal lay before the high court. respondent no 3 in both the cases preferred first appeals to the high court u s 116 as it then stood. they are fao no 292 06 and fao. no 293 06 we have to decide the fate of these pending appeals. one more aspect needs to be mentioned. under the patents  amendment  act 2005 appeal is provided to the appellate board against the order of the controller under s 25 4  however that statutory appeal is maintainable only in  post grant opposition  proceedings whereas respondent no 3 herein has instituted first appeals under the law then prevailing challenging the order rejecting  pre grant opposition  dated 23 8 06. taking into account the complexities involved in this case on account of a hiatus created by reason of the law not being brought into force in time we are of the view that the first appeals filed by respondent no 3 in the high court being fao. no 292 06 and fao. no 293 06 would remain in the high court. the said appeals would be heard and disposed of by the high court in accordance with law u s 116 of the said 1970 act as it stood on 19 10 06 the high court will hear and decide the validity of the order passed by the controller dated 23 8 06 rejecting  pre grant opposition  filed by respondent. no 3 we are informed that there are hardly one or two matters of this nature which are pending. therefore we are of the view that respondent. no 3 cannot be let without remedy. in the special circumstances of this case particularly when after 2 4 07 appeals against orders rejecting  pre grant opposition  are not maintainable and particularly when fao no 292 06 and fao no 293 06 were filed by respondent no 3 prior to 2 4 07 under the old law we are of the view that these two appeals shall be heard and decided by the high court in accordance with law. the appellate board after 2 4 07 is entitled to hear appeals only arising from orders passed by the controller under s 25 4  i e  in cases of orders passed in  post grant opposition. therefore there is no point in transferring the pending fao no 292 06 and fao no 293 06 to the appellate board which has no authority to decide matters concerning  pre grant opposition  moreover it may be noted that even section 117g which refers to transfer of pending proceedings to the appellate board is also brought into force vide notification dated 3 4 07 keeping in mind the peculiar nature of the problem in hand we are of the view that ends of justice. would be sub served if the high court is directed to hear and decide the appeals bearing fao no 292 06 and fao no 293 06 in accordance with law as it then stood i e  u s 116 under patents. amendment  act 1999 against orders passed by the controller in  pre grant opposition  proceedings.

[Facts] an fir was registered on 23 3 1996 on the statement of one prakashi devi. she stated that on the night of 22 23 3 1996 while. she and her daughter in law sheela devi were sleeping in her house around 11 30 pm the appellant jumped over the front wall of her house and broke the bulbs and ran away  that at that time no male member was present in the house except the children. that around 00 30 am the appellant again came into her house and touched her daughter in law sheela devi who woke up and raised an alarm  and that the appellant immediately ran away. the police investigated into the said complaint and submitted a report u s 173 of the code of criminal procedure  for short  the code. on that basis the following charge was framed by the judicial magistrate first class karnal against the appellant    that on 23 3 1996 after having made preparation for causing hurt or assault you committed house trespass into the house of smt. prakashi devi and thereby committed an offence punishable u s 452 ipc within my cognizance. secondly on the same date time and place you assaulted and used criminal force against abovenamed prakashi devi with intent to outrage her modesty and thereby committed an offence punishable u s 354 ipc and within my cognizance. and i hereby direct that you be tried on the above said charge by this court. emphasis supplied. when the said charged was read over and explained to the appellant he pleaded not guilty to the said charge and claimed trial. prakashi devi was examined as pw 1 she reiterated what was recorded in the fir that the appellant came into the house around 11 30 pm and broke the bulbs that he came again around 00 30 am and touched her daughter in law  sheela devi  and when her daughter in law woke up and raised an alarm the appellant ran away. in her cross examination prakashi devi stated that she has five sons  that only her husband and one son named mahavir were staying with her  that the other four sons were married and were not staying with her  that on that night her husband was away in the fields and her son mahavir was also not present in the house. however when confronted with her statement recorded in the fir she admitted having stated that when the appellant had come first time at around 11 30 pm and broke the outside bulbs her son woke up and went out of the house. she also admitted that the appellant did not touch her nor teased her nor abused her. her daughter in law sheela devi gave evidence as pw 2 and stated that she was married to one jaibir who worked in the military services  that at 11 to 11 30 pm the accused scaled the door and broke the bulbs in the verandah of her house  that when she identified the accused and raised an alarm the accused ran away  that again he came around 00 30 am by scaling the door and caught her hand  and that when she raised an alarm and when her mother in law woke up he ran away. it was elicited in her cross examination that the accused did not go towards her mother in law nor say anything to her mother in law  that she used to come to the village where her in laws were residing only when her husband came home  and that the house of her father in law was surrounded by the houses of his brothers and their sons. both pw1 and pw2 stated that the house of the accused was at a distance of 15 16 houses from the house of prakashi devi  that the accused had never come into their house earlier  that their family and the accused were not on visiting terms with each other even during functions marriages or death though they were on visiting terms with others in the village. pw 2 also stated that she did not know the particulars of the dispute between the accused and her in laws. the investigating officer was examined as pw 3 the accused examined a witness ex sarpanch of the village as dw 1 and he stated that there was a quarrel between the accused and complainant s son surinder about a water course and subsequently he came to know that the quarrel was converted into a false case against the accused by registering a false allegation that the accused had outraged the modesty of a woman. that order is challenged by the accused. one of the contentions urged by the accused before the appellate court and high court was that the charge against him was that he attempted to outrage the modesty of prakashi devi  pw 1  whereas the evidence was to show that he attempted to outrage the modesty of her daughter in law sheela devi. he contended that as the charge levelled against him was not proved and as he was not required to defend himself against a charge that he assaulted and outraged the modesty of sheela devi he ought to have been acquitted. this was negatived by the appellate court and high court holding that an accused cannot take advantage of a technical defect in framing the charge. it was held that mentioning the name of prakashi devi instead of the name of sheela devi in the charge was an error that did not prejudice the accused.
[Ratio of the decision] the following question therefore arises for our consideration  when the charge is that the accused assaulted  x  and outraged her modesty but the evidence is that he assaulted  y  to outrage her modesty can the accused be punished for having assaulting and outraging the modesty of  y  even though he was not charged with any offence with reference to  y  on the ground that the error or omission in the charge did not prejudice the accused or result in failure of justice. the following principles relating to sections 212 215 and 464 of the code relevant to this case become evident from the said enunciations   i. the object of framing a charge is to enable an accused to have a clear idea of what he is being tried for and of the essential facts that he has to meet. the charge must also contain the particulars of date time place and person against whom the offence was committed as are reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged. ii. the accused is entitled to know with certainty and accuracy the exact nature of the charge against him and unless he has such knowledge his defence will be prejudiced. where an accused is charged with having committed offence against one person but on the evidence led he is convicted for committing offence against another person without a charge being framed in respect of it the accused will be prejudiced resulting in a failure of justice. but there will be no prejudice or failure of justice where there was an error in the charge and the accused was aware of the error. such knowledge can be inferred from the defence that is if the defence of the accused showed that he was defending himself against the real and actual charge and not the erroneous charge. iii. in judging a question of prejudice as of guilt the courts must act with a broad vision and look to the substance and not to the technicalities and their main concern should be to see whether the accused had a fair trial whether he knew what he was being tried for whether the main facts sought to be established against him were explained to him fairly and clearly and whether he was given a full and fair chance to defend himself. as noticed above in this case the charge was that appellant committed trespass into the house of prakashi devi for assaulting prakashi devi and assaulted the said prakashi devi and outraged her modesty. the accused concentrated his cross examination with reference to the said charge and elicited answers showing that he did not assault or outrage the modesty of prakashi devi. he did not try to challenge the evidence let in to show that he had tried to outrage the modesty of sheela devi as he was not charged with such an offence. the evidence of pw 1 and pw 2 was that the appellant did not touch or tease or abuse prakashi devi. their evidence was that he touched caught the hand of sheela devi and when she raised an alarm he ran away. when the charge was that the accused attempted to commit trespass into the house of prakashi devi with intent to outrage the modesty of prakashi devi the conclusion of the appellate court and the high court that there was no failure of justice if he is punished for the offence of having assaulted sheela devi and outraging her modesty is opposed to principles of fair play and natural justice embodied in sections 211 212 215 and 464 of the code. when the accused is charged with having entered the house of prakashi devi and assaulted the said prakashi devi with intent to outrage her modesty and when the accused defended himself in regard to the said charge and concentrated on proving that the said charges were not true he cannot be convicted for having assaulted and outraging the modesty of someone else namely sheela devi. the accused did not have any opportunity to meet or defend himself against the charge that he assaulted sheela devi and outraged her modesty. nor did he proceed with his defence on the understanding that he was being charged with having committed the offence with reference to sheela devi. one of the fundamental principles of justice is that an accused should know what is the charge against him so that he can build his defence in regard to that charge. an accused cannot be punished for committing an offence against  y  when he is charged with having committed the offence against  x  and the entire defence of the accused was with reference to charge of having committed offence against  x. applying the guidance offered by the said illustrations and the legal principles evolved by this court the position will be as follows. if sheela devi alone had been present at the house at the time of the incident and the accused had assaulted and outraged the modesty of the said sheela devi but in the charge the name of the victim had been erroneously mentioned say as sushila devi or prakashi devi  though there was no person by such name  and the inquiry exclusively referred to the assault and outraging the modesty of sheela devi the court could infer that the accused was not misled and the error in the charge was immaterial. on the other hand if two persons were present in the house at the time of the incident namely prakashi devi and sheela devi and the accused is charged with trespassing into the house of prakashi devi and assaulting and outraging the modesty of the said prakashi devi and the witnesses refer only to the assault and outraging the modesty of sheela devi the court will have to infer that the accused was prejudiced if the accused had solely concentrated and focused his defence and entire cross examination to show that he did not commit the offences against prakashi devi. the court having charged the accused with the offence of having trespassed into the house of prakashi devi with intent to assault her and having further charged him for having assaulted the said prakashi devi by outraging her modesty convicts him on the ground that though he did not assault or outrage the modesty of prakashi devi he had outraged the modesty of sheela devi that would lead to failure of justice. there was a material error in the charge as it violated the requirement of sub s  1  of s 212 of the code that the charge shall contain particulars as to the person against whom the offence was committed. there were two women present at the house at the time of the alleged incident namely prakashi devi and her daughter in law sheela devi. in view of the specific charge the accused concentrated on showing that the charge was false. he did not attempt to meet the case made out in the trial that the offence was against sheela devi. the accused was thus clearly misled by the error in the charge which caused prejudiced to the accused thereby occasioning failure of justice. therefore we are of the view that there should be a new trial after charging him with the offence of outraging the modesty of sheela devi.

[Facts] this appeal with special leave is directed against the judgment and order of the labour appellate tribunal of india in a dispute regarding the workers  claim for bonus. during the year 1948 the appellant made a profit of rs. 11 97 648 11 9. it paid 24 3 per cent. dividend on ordinary shares  being the maximum that could be paid under the public companies  limitation of dividend  ordinance of 1948 and also paid to the workers their full share of bonus at annas 4 in a rupee of their basic earnings. during the year 1949 the selling rates for cloth and yarn were controlled by the government and were approximately 4 per cent. below those obtained in 1948. the basic wages were increased from the 1st december  1948  by order of the government of uttar pradesh and the total wages paid were therefore higher than those in the previous year. there was moreover indiscipline amongst the workers and production suffered. there was a strike in the month of october and the mills were closed for nearly a month. further the management were unable to secure cotton which resulted in the curtailment of the working hours. as a result of all these circumstances the appellant suffered a trading loss of rs. 5 02 563 1 10. a sum of rs. 2 50 000 being the excess reserve for taxation was written back and a sum of rs. 10 01 871 13 5 being the amount of reserve transferred from the investment account was also brought in. an aggregate sum of rs. 12 51 871 13 5 was thus brought into the balance sheet by these two transfers. the trading loss was deducted from this amount leaving a credit balance of rs. 7 49 308 11 7 and that amount was shown as the profit for the year 1949 in the balance sheet for that year. the balance which had been brought forward from the previous year was added thereto and a dividend of 243 4 per cent  was paid to the ordinary shareholders. the appellant also paid ex gratia to the workmen bonus at the rate of annas 2 per rupee of their basic earnings making it clear by their notification dated the 7th april  1950  that the directors had sanctioned the payment at that rate in spite of the appellant having suffered a trading loss for the year  that it was being paid entirely at the discretion of the appellant and was not related to or connected with any contract of employment of any worker. on the 4th may  1950  the secretary of the respondent union petitioned to the provincial conciliation officer  textile  that there was more production in 1949 than in 1948  that there was no reason to hold that the profit in 1949 was less than in the previous year and that the rate of bonus was wrongly reduced and asked that bonus for 1949 should also be paid at the rate of annas 4 per rupee. the industrial dispute which thus arose was referred for enquiry and recording of an award to the regional conciliation board  textile   kanpur. the conciliation board by a majority decision repelled the contention of the appellant and awarded the payment of bonus at annas 4 per rupee. on an appeal taken by the appellant to the industrial court  textiles and hosiery   kanpur  the industrial court accepted the contention of the appellant  allowed the appeal and set aside the award. the respondent thereupon appealed to the labour appellate tribunal which substantially agreed with the industrial court on questions of fact as well as the general position in law but imported considerations of social justice and treating this as a special case   where social justice would demand that labour should have bonus for the year where for that very year capital had not only a reasonable return but much in excess of that    allowed the appeal and directed the appellant to pay to the workmen bonus at the rate of annas 4 per rupee within six weeks of their decision. the appellant filed this appeal against that decision after obtaining special leave from this court. both the industrial court as well as the labour appellate tribunal found as a fact that there was a trading loss of rs. 5 02 563 1 10 during the year 1949 and also. that the dividend of 243 4 per cent. to the ordinary shareholders was distributed after transferring the aggregate sum of rs. 12 51 871 13 5 from the reserves. this case was negatived by the industrial court as well as the labour appellate tribunal  both of whom held that the working of the appellant during the year 1949 had resulted in a loss. whereas the industrial court declined to grant the respondent any relief because the working of the appellant during the year had resulted in a loss  the labour appellate tribunal made a special case for the respondent in spite of its concurrence with that finding of the industrial court. it is significant to observe that this principle was accepted by the labour appellate tribunal itself. the labour appellate tribunal did not accept the contention of the respondent that bonus should be linked to dividends nor did it rest its decision on the respondent having a right  title and interest in the reserves and the undistributed profits of the appellant. linking of bonus to dividend would obviously create difficulties. indeed the full bench of the labour appellate tribunal evolved the abovequoted formula with a view to dispensing social justice between the various parties concerned.
[Ratio of the decision] the question which therefore arises for our consideration is mainly whether the workers are entitled to the payment of a bonus in spite of the employer having worked at a loss during the year and incidentally whether the workers have any right  title or interest in the reserves and the undistributed profits of the previous years. the primary meaning of the word   bonus   according to the definition given in the new english dictionary is    a boon or gift over and above what is nominally due as remuneration to the receiver and which is therefore something wholly to the good. this definition was adopted by stirling j  in in re eddystone marine insurance co  l  r   i894  w  n  30  webster s international dictionary defines bonus as  something given in addition to what is ordinarily received by or strictly due to the recipient. the oxford concise dictionary defines it as   something to the good  into the bargain  and as an example  gratuity to workmen beyond their wages. corpus juris secundum  volume xi  at page 515 ascribes the following meanings to the word bonus    an allowance in addition to what is usual current or stipulated   a sum given or paid beyond what is legally required to be paid to the recipient  something given in addition to what is ordinarily received by or strictly due to the recipient  and adds  it has been said to carry the idea of something uncertain and indefinite  something which may or may not be paid depending on varying circumstances and under particular conditions has been said to imply a benefit accruing to him who offers it and an inducement to the offeree. this imports the conception of a boon  a gift or a gratuity otherwise described as an ex gratia payment. the word  bonus  has however acquired a secondary meaning in the sphere of industrial relations. it is classified amongst the methods of wage payment. it has been used especially in the united states of america to designate an award in addition to the contractual wage. it is usually intended as a stimulus to extra effort but sometimes represents the desire of the employer to share with his workers the fruits of their common enterprise. vide encyclopaedia britannica  volume iii  page 856. the pocket part of the corpus juris secundum  volume xi  under the heading  as compensation for services  quotes the following passage from attorney general v  city of woburn  317 mass  465     the word  bonus  is commonly used to denote an increase in salary or wages in contracts of employment. the offer of a bonus is the means frequently adopted to secure continuous service from an employee to enhance his efficiency and to augment his loyalty to his employer and the employee s acceptance of the offer by performing the things called for by the offer binds employer to pay the bonus so called. it also gives another meaning of the word bonus   viz    increased compensation for services already rendered gratuitously or for a prescribed compensation where there is neither express or implied understanding that additional compensation may be granted. this imports the conception that even though the payment be not strictly due to the recipient nor legally enforceable by him  a claim to the same may be laid by the employee under certain conditions and if such claim is entertained either by an agreement with the employer or by adjudication before a properly constituted tribunal as on an industrial dispute arising. the same would ripen into a legally enforceable claim. there are however two conditions which have to be satisfied before a demand for bonus can be justified and they are   1  when wages fall short of the living standard and  2  the industry makes huge profits part of which are due to the contribution which the workmen make in increasing production. the demand for bonus becomes an industrial claim when either or both these conditions are satisfied. the principles for the grant of bonus were discussed and a formula was evolved by the full bench of the labour appellate tribunal in millowners  association  bombay v  rashtreeya mill mazdoor sangh  bombay   1950. 2 l l j  247  as. both labour and capital contribute to the earnings of the industrial concern  it is fair that labour should derive some benefit  if there is a surplus after meeting prior or necessary charges  and the following were prescribed as the first charges on gross profits  viz. 1  provision for depreciation   2  reserves for rehabilitation   3  a return at 6 per cent. on the paid up capital. a return on the working capital at a lesser rate than the return on paid up capital. the surplus that remained after meeting the aforesaid deductions would be available for distribution as bonus. it is therefore clear that the claim for bonus can be made by the employees only if as a result of the joint contribution of capital and labour the industrial concern has earned profits. if in any particular year the working of the industrial concern has resulted in loss there is no basis nor justification for a demand for bonus. bonus is not a deferred wage. because if it were so it would necessarily rank for precedence before dividends  the dividends can only be paid out of profits and unless and until profits are made no occasion or question can also arise for distribution of any sum as bonus amongst the employees. if the industrial concern has resulted in a trading loss  there would be no profits of the particular year available for distribution of dividends  much less could the employees claim the distribution of bonus during that year. this has been clearly recognised even in the various decisions of the labour appellate tribunal  e g   nizam sugar factory ltd   hyderabad v  their workmen   1952. i l l j  386  textile mills  madhya pradesh v  their workmen   1952  2 l l j  625 and famous cine laboratory v  their workmen   1953. i. l l j  466 this was also the basis of the demand of the respondent in the case before us  its case being that the appellant had reaped substantial profits during the year 1949. because if that theory was accepted a company would not declare any dividends but accumulate the profits  build up reserves and distribute those profits in the shape of bonus shares or reduce the capital in which event the workers would not be entitled to claim anything as and by way of bonus. the workers not being members of the company would also not have any right  title and interest in the reserves or the undistributed profits which would form part of the assets of the company. even on a winding up of a company the property of the company would be applied in satisfaction of its liabilities pari passu and  unless the articles of association of the company otherwise provided  in distribution amongst the members according to their rights and interest in the company. the employees would in no event be entitled to any share or interest in the assets and the capital of the company. a transfer of moneys from these reserves or the undistributed profits would therefore not enure for the benefit of the workers. the shareholders only would be entitled to such benefit and the mere fact that dividends were declared and paid to the shareholders out of such reserves and undistributed profits would not entitle the workers to demand bonus when in fact the working of the industrial concern during the particular year had showed a loss. it has also got to be remembered that the labour force employed in an industrial concern is a fluctuating body and it cannot be predicated of the labour force in a particular year that it represents the past and the present workers  so that it can claim to demand bonus out of the reserves or undistributed profits of the previous years. on the accounts of each year being made up and the profits of the industrial concern being ascertained the workers during the particular year have their demand for bonus fully satisfied out of the surplus profits and the balance of profits is allocated and carried over in the accounts. no further claimed payment of bonus out of those reserves or undistributed profits can therefore survive. to admit the claim for bonus out of the reserves transferred to the profit and loss account would tantamount to allowing a second bonus on the same profits in respect of which the workers had already received their full bonus in the previous year. the labour force which earns the profits of a particular year by collaborating with the employers is distinct from the one which contributed to the profits of the previous years and there is no continuity between the labour forces which are employed in the industrial concern during the several years. the ratio which applies in the case of the shareholders who acquire the right  title and interest of their predecessorsin interest does not apply to the labour force and the fact that the shareholders get a dividend by transfer of funds from the reserves and undistributed profits of the previous years would not entitle the workers to demand bonus out of those funds if the working of the industrial concern during the particular year has resulted in a trading loss. the considerations of social justice imported by the labour appellate tribunal in arriving at the decision in favour of the respondent were not only irrelevant but untenable. social justice is a very vague and indeterminate expression and no clear cut definition can be laid down which will cover all the situations. without committing ourselves to the acceptance of the above formula in its entirety we may point out that the labour appellate tribunal did not apply its own formula to the facts of the present case. it is also significant to note that even while importing considerations of social justice the labour appellate tribunal was oblivious of the fact that it was by their own acts of indiscipline and strike that the workers of the appellant company themselves contributed  to the trading losses incurred by the appellant and it hardly lay in their mouth then to contend that they were none the less entitled to a payment of bonus commensurate with the dividend paid to the shareholders out of the undistributed profits of the previous years. the labour appellate tribunal also overlooked the fact that but for the public companies  limitation of dividend. ordinance of 1948 the whole of the profits of 1948 could have been distributed after paying the workers bonus in that year of four annas in the rupee. we may before concluding refer to an argument which was addressed to us by mr  isaacs  the learned counsel for the respondent  that this court under article 136 should not interfere with the decisions of the tribunals set up by the industrial disputes act  1947. this contention can be shortly answered by referring to our decision in bharat bank ltd   delhi v  employees of the bharat bank ltd   delhi   1950  s c r  459 1950 indlaw sc 48  where we held that the industrial tribunals were tribunals within the meaning of article 136 and further that article 136 has vested in this  court exceptional and overriding power to interfere where it reaches the conclusion that a person has been dealt with arbitrarily or that a court or tribunal within the territory of india has not given a fair deal to a litigant. vide dhakeswari cotton mills ltd  v  commissioner of income tax  west bengal 1954 indlaw sc 213.

[Facts] leave granted in slp  crl. no 3737 2014. these appeals are preferred by four accused against the common judgment of the high court of chhattisgarh at bilaspur confirming the judgment of the additional sessions judge bemetara district durg convicting the appellants u s 302 read with ss 34 and 120b of the indian penal code  hereinafter referred to as  ipc   and sentencing each of them to undergo imprisonment for life with a fine of rs 1 000   and in default to undergo additional rigorous imprisonment for three months. these appeals have been taken up for disposal together since they arise from a common judgment of the high court deciding the appeals of the accused. the appellant  raju. devendra choubey  accused no 4  has filed criminal appeal no 822 of 2012 the appellant  mahesh  accused no 3  has filed criminal appeal no 867 of 2013 the appellant  beenu. chandra prakash  accused no 2  has filed criminal appeal no 589 of 2014 the appellant  smt. shashi tripathi  accused no 1  has filed criminal appeal arising out of special leave petition  criminal  no 3737 of 2014. pw 1  dr. sharda prasad tripathi is the husband of accused shashi tripathi. on 25 11 2003 when pw 1  dr. sharda prasad tripathi came home from his clinic found that his daughter in law bhavna tripathi has been murdered. he lodged a first information report  f i r   on 25 11 2003 at about 20 45 hours. the crime was registered. he deposed in court that on 25 11 2003 when he returned home he found servant anil kumar  pw 21  was weeping. when he went inside he found his daughter in law  bhavna and wife  shashi lying in the courtyard. bhavna was dead. shashi was unconscious. there were numerous injuries including incised wounds on bhavna none on shashi. after registration of the crime inquest was conducted over the dead body of bhavna on 26 11 2003 post mortem was conducted by dr. naresh tiwari and dr. m deodhar who gave their report which is marked as exhibit p 18 spot map was prepared by the inquiry officer  io   bloodstained cloth of accused shashi tripathi was taken into possession along with broken bangles  bloodstained cement mortar and plain cement mortar were also taken into possession. shashi tripathi mahesh and binu. chandra prakash were arrested on 29 11 2003 a bloodstained knife was taken into possession. the accused raju. devendra choubey was taken into custody on 22 12 2003 and a suzuki motorcycle was also taken into possession. a test identification was conducted by the executive magistrate in the sub jail bemetara on 13 12 2003 a similar identification parade of raju. devendra choubey was conducted on 26 12 2003 after his arrest. a sealed packet containing hair found in the grip of the deceased and another sealed packet containing bloodstained cloth of the deceased were taken into possession vide exhibit p 35. according to the prosecution the accused shashi tripathi is the step mother in law of deceased bhavna tripathi. bhavna was married to her step son  jitendra kumar in july 2003 shashi tripathi used to be annoyed with bhavna tripathi on account of some domestic dispute. she engaged the other accused for murdering bhavna. bhavna was murdered on 25 11 2003 at about 18 30 hours in the house where she resided with shashi tripathi. there is no dispute that bhavna s death is homicidal. dr. m deodhar who conducted the postmortem opined that cause of her death was neurogenic and hemorrhagic shock. the injuries found on person of the deceased were as follows   external injuries   1  incised wound on left scapular region of size 3 cm x 1 cm   2  incised wound on left scapular region of size 4 cm x 1   cm. x 1   cm   3. one incised wound on left auxiliary region on the posterior auxiliary region of size 3 cm x 2 cm x 3 cm. 4  incised wound on lower costal region left of size. 3   cm x. 2 cm x 1 cm   5  incised wound on lower costal region right side on right epigestic region of size 3   cm. x 3 cm with punctured wound   6  incised wound over right costal region of size 3 cm x 2 cm x 1 cm. 7  incised wound on right supra mammary region near middle of size 4 cm x 1 cm x. 1   cm   8  incised wound on right supra mammary region lateral aspect of size 3 cm x 1   cm x 1   cm   9  incised wound on radial aspect of left forearm near wrist joint of size 2. cm x. cm x   cm   10  incised wound on forearm left hand radial side dorsal aspect on lower 2 3rd region   11  incised wound on left forearm middle l 3rd region radial side and posterior aspect of size 2. cm. x 1  cm x 1 cm   12  incised wound on left hand dorsal aspect on 2 nd and 3rd metacarpal region of size 2  cm. x   cm. x. 1  cm   13  incised wound on ulna region of left hand on lower 1 3rd region of size 1 cm. x   cm x. 1 cm  and  14  incised wound over left side of neck on anterior triangle of size 2 cm. x 1   cm. internal injuries  brain membrane pale  lungs trachea pale punctured wound on right and left lungs of size 2 cm x 1 cm 2   cm and 1 cm. x 3 cm  lobe was cut and there was 3 cm punctured wound. incised wound was also present on the right lobe of size 3 cm x 1 3 cm x 3  cm. liver kidney and spleen were pale. the deceased was carrying fetus of two months. the sole eyewitness was a boy of 13 years of age  anil kumar  pw 21  who worked as a servant with the family. shashi tripathi had brought him home from bilaspur. he participated in the identification parade which was held in sub jail bemetara and identified the accused persons in the court by touching them. it is anil kumar  pw  21  who first informed the head of the family dr. sharda prasad tripathi  pw 1  the complainant about the incident when he came home after closing his clinic. he deposed before the court that shashi didi  accused  brought him to village  jevra from bilaspur. he lived in the house of shashi didi. he ate his food there and studied in a school. he deposed that doctor sahab is her husband and shivendra and jitendra are her sons. jitendra is her step son and the deceased bhavna is the wife of jitendra. she resided with shashi didi. jitendra is a doctor resided and practiced at khamaria whereas his wife resided at jevra. his brother  shivendra studies at calcutta. he referred to bhavna as bhabhi. he stated that shashi didi and bhavna sometimes used to quarrel. about the assault he deposed that devendra caught bhavna and chandra prakash attacked her with knife 3 to 4 times and she fell down. the incident occurred in the courtyard and shashi didi was present in the passage. mahesh the fourth accused was standing outside the house. after the assault chandra prakash went to the tv room where shashi didi had kept some money in a rubber band on the table. the accused  chandra prakash had threatened him not to disclose anything about the incident to anyone. thereafter all the three accused fled from there. he further deposed that shashi didi took him upstairs to the terrace and asked him not to disclose the truth to anyone but to say that thieves came into the house and committed the crime. shashi didi thereafter started shouting. then she lay down on the courtyard near bhavna bhabhi.
[Ratio of the decision] we have carefully examined the manner in which the identification parade was conducted and the manner in which the boy  anil kumar  pw 21  identified the accused in court and we have no reason to doubt the identification of the accused which assumes importance in this case since the boy did not know the accused before the incident. this deposition clearly implicates accused nos 1 2 and 4 the picture that emerges is that shashi tripathi caused bhavna to be killed and for this purpose engaged chandra prakash  accused no 2  and raju. devendra choubey  accused no 4  by paying them money. she also seems to have had a scuffle with bhavna which is apparent from the fact that her hair was found in the grip of the deceased during investigation. it is obvious that accused nos 2 and 4 did not enter the house to commit a robbery and had a single mission namely to kill bhavana. there is no evidence that they had any previous animosity with the deceased and appeared to have acted as contract killers. the prosecution has found it difficult to pinpoint the motive but shashi tripathi s husband dr. sharda prasad tripathi  pw 1  deposed before the court that she tried to create a hindrance in the marriage of his son jitendra since she wanted her daughter abhilasha to marry him  however he went ahead with the marriage of jitendra to bhavna whereupon shashi tripathi remained silent. on a careful perusal of the deposition of this child witness we have not found any reason why he would have lied. he was brought to the house by shashi tripathi  accused  who apparently took care of him and sent to school and gave him food and residence. he had no grouse against her neither any ulterior motive in identifying the accused who were not acquainted to him. there was no reason for the sole eye witness  anil  pw 21  to implicate anybody falsely. merely because he has been some time in the company of the police at the police station his testimony cannot be discarded as untrue. the incident occurred within the four walls of the house of the accused  shashi tripathi and the only witness was the boy  anil. pw 21  his statement that the accused chandra prakash attacked the deceased is corroborated by the recovery of knife from chandra prakash. it must be remembered that the boy comes from a rural back ground and was 13 years of age when the incident occurred. his presence in the house is entirely natural and we have no reason to discard his testimony. it is not possible for us to accept this contention. mahesh and chandra prakash were arrested on 29 11 2003 their identification parade was conducted on 13 12 2003   within a fortnight or so. the accused devendra kumar was arrested on 22 12 2003 and his identification parade was conducted on 26 12 2003  within four days  there is no evidence on record to show that the child witness had an opportunity to see and study the features of the accused between their arrest and test identification parade to enable a tutored identification. in any case the period between the arrest and the identification parade was not large enough to constitute inordinate delay. the observations of this court undoubtedly lay down the correct law and we have no reason to doubt them. we however do not see how the observations help the appellants. in the present case the child witness has been found to be reliable. his presence is not doubted since he resided with the family for whom he worked. he had no axe to grind against any of the accused. he became the unfortunate witness of a gruesome murder and fearlessly identified the accused in court. in his deposition he specified the details of the part which the accused played with reasonable particularity. in such a situation it is considered a safe rule of prudence to generally look for corroboration of the sworn testimony of witness in court as to the identity of the accused who are strangers to them in the form of earlier identification proceeding as observed by this court in budhsen s case 1970 indlaw sc 136  supra. this court has not laid down the requirement in general that all identification parades must be under the supervision of a magistrate as in budhsen s case 1970 indlaw sc 136  supra  the learned counsel for the appellants also relied upon the judgments of this court in subash and shiv kumar vs. state of u p  1987  3 scc 331 1987 indlaw sc 28887 and mohd. abdul hafeez vs. state of andhra pradesh air 1983. sc 367 1982 indlaw sc 63 the facts and circumstances of the cases are however different and it is not necessary to consider those cases in detail while dealing with the present case. suffice it to say that those cases do not create any doubt as regards the conviction in this case. it is settled law that common intention and conspiracy are matters of inference and if while drawing an inference any benefit of doubt creeps in it must go to the accused vide baliya vs. state of m p  2012. 9 scc 696 2012 indlaw sc 343. on a careful conspectus of the facts and the law we are of the view that the prosecution has failed to prove the guilt of mahesh beyond reasonable doubt. there is no evidence of his having played any part in the crime. he was merely seen by the witness as standing outside the house when the witness came home. mahesh did not even act as a guard  he did not prevent anil kumar  pw 21  from entering the house. there is no evidence of the formation or sharing of any common intention with the other accused. there is no reference to a third person in the fir  no evidence that he came with the other accused or left with them. no weapon was seized from him nor was any property connected with the crime seized. having regard to the role attributed to him and the absence of incriminating factors we find that it is not safe to convict mahesh of the offence of murder with the aid of ss 34 and 120 b.

[Facts] leave granted. these appeals have been preferred from the judgment and order of the high court dated 25 11 2009 in writ petitions  civil  no 46457 2009. the appellants challenge the acquisition of their agricultural lands by the state of uttar pradesh for the construction of the district jail of shahjahanpur. the appellants themselves are bhumidar with transferable rights and are residents of village murchha tehsil puwayan in the district of shahjahanpur uttar pradesh. the state of uttar pradesh vide its office memorandum dated 25 10 2004 constituted a committee under the chairmanship of the hon ble minister of revenue to suggest its recommendations for transfer of prisons situated in the congested areas of various districts. after conducting its second and final meeting on 10th. january 2005 the said committee recommended to the state government the shifting of the district jails from congested areas to outside the city limits within the district. as per the schedule this shifting was to be done in two phases  1 st phase 1 district jail shahjahanpur  2 district jail azamgarh  3 district jail jaunpur  and 4 district jail moradabad. 2 nd phase 1 district jail badaun  2 district jail varanasi  3 district jail barielly  and 4 district jail muzaffarnagar. the existing district jail of shahjahanpur constructed in 1870 was one of the oldest and required shifting to new premises. the government case is that the district jail is located in a densely populated area of the city and is overcrowded housing as many as 1869 prisoners while having a capacity of only 511. thereafter the state government constituted a committee under the chairmanship of chief secretary government of u p vide office memorandum dated 12 9 2007 to evaluate and consider the shifting of prisons identified to be shifted in the first phase. prisons in the districts of lucknow moradabad were added to the list. this committee was also to evaluate and recommend the means for modernisation of existing old prisons. in its meeting dated 10 10 2007 the committee recommended that a detailed project report  dpr  be prepared by the rajkiya nirman nigam and that acquisition of lands for shifting of the prisons be done on a priority basis. these recommendations were accepted by the state government vide the approval of the cabinet dated 7 12 2007 following this decision the director general of prisons  administration and reforms  uttar pradesh vide letter dated 04 06 2008 requested the district magistrate shahjahanpur to send all the relevant records to the state government for publication of notification u ss 4 1  and 17 of the land acquisition act 1894  hereinafter  the act   the land suggested for such acquisition by the divisional land utility committee was. one admeasuring 25 89 hectares  63 93 acres  in village morchha tehsil puwayan in the district of shahjahanpur. thereafter the district magistrate shahjahanpur forwarded the proposal to the commissioner and director directorate of land acquisition  revenue board uttar pradesh  for the issuance of notifications u ss 4 1  and 17 of the act which in turn approved of it and further forwarded the recommendation to the state government vide letter dated 2 07 2008. thus the state government issued notifications u ss 4 1  and 17 on 21 08 2008. however the provisions of section 5a inquiry were dispensed with. the state government explained that this was done in view of the pressing urgency in the matter of construction of the jails. being aggrieved by the aforesaid notifications the appellants moved a writ petition before the high court u art 226 of the constitution of india.
[Ratio of the decision] before this court the appellants broadly raised the following arguments  1 whether or not the state government was justified in acquiring the said pieces of fertile agricultural land when there were alternative sites of unfertile banjar land available. 2 whether or not the state government was justified in dispensing with the inquiry which is mandated to be conducted under section 5a of the act especially when one year elapsed between the notifications u s 4 and the one u s 6 they further stated that the high court had erred insofar as it upheld the factum of urgency in the absence of a categorical finding an enquiry under section 5a would have been detrimental to public interest. this court finds a lot of substance in the contentions of the appellants. in connection with land acquisition proceeding whenever the provision of s 17 and its various sub sections including s 17 4  is used in the name of taking urgent or emergent action and the right of hearing of the land holder under section 5a is dispensed with the court is called upon to consider a few fundamentals in the exercise of such powers. admittedly the land acquisition act a pre constitutional legislation of colonial vintage is a drastic law being expropriatory in nature as it confers on the state a power which affects person s property right. even though right to property is no longer fundamental and was never a natural right and is acquired on a concession by the state it has to be accepted that without right to some property other rights become illusory. this court is considering these questions especially in the context of some recent trends in land acquisition. this court is of the opinion that the concept of public purpose in land acquisition has to be viewed from an angle which is consistent with the concept of a welfare state. the concept of public purpose cannot remain static for all time to come. the concept even though sought to be defined u s 3 f  of the act is not capable of any precise definition. the said definition having suffered several amendments has assumed the character of an inclusive one. it must be accepted that in construing public purpose a broad and overall view has to be taken and the focus must be on ensuring maximum benefit to the largest number of people. any attempt by the state to acquire land by promoting a public purpose to benefit a particular group of people or to serve any particular interest at the cost of the interest of a large section of people especially of the common people defeats the very concept of public purpose. even though the concept of public purpose was introduced by pre constitutional legislation its application must be consistent with the constitutional ethos and especially the chapter under fundamental rights and also the directive principles. in construing the concept of public purpose the mandate of art 13 of the constitution that any pre constitutional law cannot in any way take away or abridge rights conferred under part iii must be kept in mind. by judicial interpretation the contents of these part iii rights are constantly expanded. the meaning of public purpose in acquisition of land must be judged on the touchstone of this expanded view of part iii rights. the open ended nature of our constitution needs a harmonious reconciliation between various competing principles and the overhanging shadows of socio economic reality in this country. therefore the concept of public purpose on this broad horizon must also be read into the provisions of emergency power u s 17 with the consequential dispensation of right of hearing under section 5a of the said act. the courts must examine these questions very carefully when little indians lose their small property in the name of mindless acquisition at the instance of the state. if public purpose can be satisfied by not rendering common man homeless and by exploring other avenues of acquisition the courts before sanctioning an acquisition must in exercise of its power of judicial review focus its attention on the concept of social and economic justice. while examining these questions of public importance the courts especially the higher courts cannot afford to act as mere umpires. in other words public purpose must be viewed through the prism of constitutional values as stated above. the aforesaid principles in our jurisprudence compel this court to construe any expropriartory legislation like the land acquisition act very strictly. the judicial pronouncements on this aspect are numerous only a few of them may be noted here. in the background of the aforesaid discussion this court proceeds to examine the scope of a person s right under section 5a of the act. initially section 5a was not there in the land acquisition act 1894 but the same was inserted long ago by the land acquisition  amendment  act 1923 vide s 3 of act 38 of 1923. the question is whether in the admitted facts of this case invoking the urgency clause u s 17  4  is justified. in the writ petition before the high court the petitioners have given the details of the land holding and it has also been stated that the entire holding of petitioners 2 5 7 9 10 11 and 13 have been acquired and as a result of such acquisition the petitioners have become landless. from the various facts disclosed in the said affidavit it appears that the matter was initiated by the government s letter dated 4th of june 2008 for issuance of s 4 1  and s 17 notifications. a meeting for selection of the suitable site for construction was held on 27th june 2008 and the proposal for such acquisition and construction was sent to the director land acquisition on 2nd of july 2008 this was in turn forwarded to the state government by the director on 22nd of july 2008 after due consideration of the forwarded proposal and documents the state government issued the s 4 notification along with s 17 notification on 21st of august 2008 these notifications were published in local newspapers on 24th of september 2008. thereafter over a period of 9 months the state government deposited 10  of compensation payable to the landowners along with 10  of acquisition expenses and 70  of cost of acquisition was deposited and the proposal for issuance of s 6 declaration was sent to the director land acquisition on 19th of june 2009 the director in turn forwarded all these to the state government on 17th july 2009 and the state government finally issued the s 6 declaration on 10th of august 2009 this declaration was published in the local dailies on 17th of august 2009. thus the time which elapsed between publication of s 4 1  and s 17 notifications and s 6 declaration in the local newspapers is of 11 months and 23 days i e almost one year. this slow pace at which the government machinery had functioned in processing the acquisition clearly evinces that there was no urgency for acquiring the land so as to warrant invoking s 17  4  of the act. in paragraph 15 of the writ petition it has been clearly stated that there was a time gap of more than 11 months between s 4 and s 6 notifications which demonstrates that there was no urgency in the state action which could deny the petitioners their right under section 5a in the counter which was filed in this case by the state before the high court it was not disputed that the time gap between s 4 notification read with section 17 and s 6 notification was about 11 months. the construction of jail is certainly in public interest and for such construction land may be acquired. but such acquisition can be made only by strictly following the mandate of the said act. in the facts of this case such acquisition cannot be made by invoking emergency provisions of s 17 if so advised government can initiate acquisition proceeding by following the provision of section 5a of the act and in accordance with law.

[Facts] aggrieved by the decision of customs excise and gold control appellate tribunal  cegat  dated 11 4 2000 the appellants  assessee  have come by way of civil appeals under section 35l of the central excise act 1944. appellants were engaged in the manufacture of biscuits classifiable under sub heading 1905 11 of the central excise tariff. the biscuits were sold under the brand name  meghraj  under show cause notices it was alleged that the appellants herein  assessee  have sold the biscuits under the brand name  meghraj  which was a registered trade mark of kay aar biscuits  p  ltd who was using the said trade mark on manufacture of biscuits themselves and therefore the appellants were not eligible to the benefit of ssi notification no 1 93 ce dated 28 2 1993 as amended by notification no 59 94 ce dated 1 3 1994. the above show cause notices were issued by the department demanding differential duty for the period april 1994 to june 1994 amounting to rs 3 74 948  plus short paid duty for the period april 1995 to may 1995 amounting to rs 92 992 the said demand was based on an agreement detected by the department. that agreement was between madan verma director of a company known as m s. ltd  ghaziabad and m s. rich food products  p  ltd  noida. under the said agreement m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd was. party no 1 under the agreement. it was declared that m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd was the owner of the registered trade mark  meghraj  under the agreement. it was stated that m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd was using the aforestated trade mark  meghraj  for the manufacture of biscuits. under the agreement there was a recital under which it was stated that m s. ltd had put up a unit for manufacture of wafers in noida which it sought to manufacture under the brand name  meghraj  under. the said agreement m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd gave permission to m s. rich food products pvt. ltd to use its trade mark for the manufacture of wafers alone. the said agreement was valid for three years commencing from 22 11 1989. the assistant commissioner ghaziabad examined the printed wrappers. he came to the conclusion vide his orders that the trade name  meghraj  was in the form of a logo printed on the wrapper of the biscuits and therefore the appellants were not entitled to the benefit of notification no 1 93 ce dated 28 2 93 as amended by notification no 59 94 dated 1 3 94 consequently the adjudicating authority called upon the appellants to pay differential duty for the period april 1994 to june 1994 amounting to rs 3 74 948 plus short paid duty for the period april 1995 to may 1995 amounting to rs 92 992. aggrieved by the decision of the adjudicating authority the assessee preferred appeals to the commissioner  a  the said appeals were rejected on the ground that the appellants were using the brand name  meghraj  of another manufacturer m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd on their products  biscuits  and therefore they were not entitled to the benefit of exemption under notification no 1 93 ce as amended. it was held that the word  meghraj  was printed on all the printed wrappers and therefore it was wrong to say that the appellants were not using the brand name  meghraj  on its products. in this connection reliance was placed by the commissioner  a  on the said agreement dated 22 11 89 before the commissioner  a  the appellants herein contended that they had used the name  m s. meghraj biscuits industries ltd   on the wrapper and not on the product. and therefore they were entitled to exemption. this argument was rejected by the commissioner  a  saying that the appellants were using the brand name  meghraj  on their products. according to the commissioner  a  the appellants used the trade name  meghraj  in the form of a logo which was printed on the wrapper. this contention was rejected by the commissioner  a  on the ground that under the notification no 1 93 ce as amended exemption was not available to the specified goods bearing brand name or trade name  registered or not  of another person. since the appellants herein had used the trade name  meghraj  on their products which trade name was owned by m s. ltd the appellants were not entitled to the benefit of exemption under notification no 1 93 ce as amended. accordingly the commissioner  a  dismissed the appeals. the orders of the commissioner  a  have been confirmed by order dated 11 4 2000 passed by cegat. hence these civil appeals. to complete the chronology of events it may be pointed out that after the impugned decision of the tribunal dated 11 4 2000 the appellants herein moved an application for rectification on 12 5 2000  rom no 72 2000  in that application it was urged on behalf of the appellants herein that the said brand name  meghraj  did not belong to m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd   that the department has failed to discharge its burden to prove that the trade name  meghraj  belonged to m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd   that a mere agreement between m s. rich food products  p  ltd would not be sufficient to prove that m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd was the lawful owner of the brand name. meghraj  in the rectification application. it was further pointed out that in fact the appellants had applied for ownership of the brand name  meghraj  vide application dated 30 9 91 to the registrar trade marks under the trade marks act and that the said application for registration was pending before the competent authority and since the above arguments were not recorded in the impugned order of the cegat dated 11 4 2000 the same warranted rectification. by order dated 8 12 2000 cegat rejected the above rectification application made by the appellants.
[Ratio of the decision] kay aar biscuits  p. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd. ltd and m s. one more fact needs to be mentioned that on 30 6 2000 the registrar of trade marks appears to have issued registration certificate on 30 6 2000 registering the trade mark  meghraj  in favour of the appellants with effect form 30 9 91 it appears that issuance of this certificate was mentioned before the cegat which rejected the rectification application on 8 12 2000. notification no 1 93 ce dated 28 2 93 was issued to help the ssi units to survive in the market dominated by brand name trade name. the object of the notification therefore was to help the ssi units and thereby increased industrial production. under para  4  of the said notification the benefit of exemption was not available for excisable goods bearing brand name or trade name  registered or not  of another person. explanation ix defined the word  brand name  or  trade name  the same is quoted hereinbelow. in the present case as stated above m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd entered into an agreement on 22 11 89 with m s. rich food products  p  ltd. under that agreement the director of m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd declared that his company was the owner of the registered trade mark  meghraj  the name of that director is madan verma. he is the director of the appellants  company  also. further there is no evidence to show as to whether m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd was an  eligible manufacturer. no explanation has been given as to why madan verma has not been examined by the appellants. he has not been examined even on the question of alleged transfer of the trade mark in favour of the appellants. in the circumstances we do not find any merit in this appeal. applying the ratio of the above judgment to the present case it is clear that grant of registration certificate under the trade marks act will not automatically provide benefit of exemption to the ssi unit. applying the above test to the facts of the present case madan verma is a common director in the two companies. he has filed an affidavit enclosing the registration certificate dated 30 6 2000. however in that affidavit he has not stated as to on what basis in the agreement of 23 11 89 signed by him he had declared that m s. ltd is the owner of the registered trade mark  meghraj  there is no deed of assignment from m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd in favour of the appellants herein. the department has rightly placed reliance on the agreement of 23 11 89 in the circumstances the burden was on the assessee  appellants herein  to satisfy the adjudicating authority that there was no intention of indicating a connection with the goods of the assessee and such other person. this argument is based on the concept of abandonment. we do not find any merit in this argument. discontinuation of business in respect of a product does not necessarily amount to abandonment. in the present case there is no evidence from the side of the appellants indicating abandonment of the trade mark by m s. although madan verma the director of m s. kay aar biscuits  p  ltd  has filed his affidavit enclosing the registration certificate he has nowhere stated that m s. ltd has abandoned the trade mark. in the circumstances the department was right in rejecting the above contention. abandonment of the trade mark has to be proved by the appellants in the present case. the burden is on the appellants particularly when the department is relying upon the agreement dated 23 11 89 between m s. lastly we are required to examine the retrospective effect of the registration certificate dated 30 6 2000 with effect from 30 9 91 at the outset we may reiterate that the object of the exemption notification was neither to protect the owners of the trade mark nor the consumers from being misled. these are considerations which are relevant in disputes arising under the trade marks act. the object of the exemption notification no 1 93 ce was to grant benefits to those industries which do not have the advantage of a brand name. however since retrospective nature of the registration certificate dated 30 6 2000 is repeatedly being raised in this court we would like to examine the case law in this regard. the trade marks act 1999 has been enacted to amend and consolidate the law relating to trade marks to provide for registration and better protection of trade marks and for prevention of the use of fraudulent marks. u s 28 of the trade marks act 1999 registration gives to the registered proprietor of the trade mark the exclusive right to the use of the trade mark in relation to the goods in respect of which the trade mark is registered and to obtain relief in respect of infringement of the trade mark in the manner provided by the trade marks act. it is correct to say that the registrar trade marks can issue registration certificate u s 28 of the trade marks act with retrospective effect. the question before us is   what is the effect of issuance of registration certificate with retrospective effect. on reading the above quoted paragraphs from the above judgment with which we agree it is clear that the effect of making the registration certificate applicable from retrospective date is based on the principle of deemed equivalence to public user of such mark. this deeming fiction cannot be extended to the excise law. it is confined to the provisions of the trade marks act. in a given case like the present case where there is evidence with the department of the trade mark being owned by m s. ltd and where there is evidence of the appellants trading on the reputation of m s. ltd which is not rebutted by the appellants  assessee  issuance of registration certificate with retrospective effect cannot confer the benefit of exemption notification to the assessee. in the present case issuance of registration certificate with retrospective effect from 30 9 91 will not tantamount to conferment of exemption benefit under the excise law once it is found that the appellants had wrongly used the trade mark of m s. according to this provision not only a person should claim to be the proprietor of a trade mark but he should prove that he had used it as such proprietor on his goods. then turning to the label as it stood at the date of the application two names appeared on the label one of kipre and co and the other of the respondent company. if these two names had stood by themselves without any further description of either of them it could be said that both kipre and co and the respondent company were jointly the owners of the mark as well as the owners of the goods to which the label was affixed. but that is not the case. the respondent company is described as the sole distributors on the label. the reasonable inference that could be drawn from this description surely is that the goods were the property of kipre and co and so also the mark. if the respondent company was really the proprietor of the mark and also the owner of the goods one would expect some such words as  manufactured by kipre and co for brandon and co  private ltd. in the absence of any such words a person buying any of these goods on reading the label would naturally believe that what he was buying was the property of kipre and co which was selling its goods under the mark  monarch. it is true as contended by mr. shah that even distributors and sellers may have marks of their own but then there are ways and ways of indicating on the label itself that the mark embodied therein is the mark belonging to such distributor or seller. obviously therefore on the label as it stood it could not be said that the respondent company was the proprietor of the mark  monarch  nor could it be said that the mark was used by the respondent company as proprietor thereof. in the present case the facts are entirely different. in the present case there is no deed or assignment from m s. ltd to the m s. meghraj biscuits industries ltd  appellants herein  as stated above there is no proof of acquisition on payment or consideration by the appellants to m s kay aar biscuits  p  ltd. in the present case there is no evidence of assignment or licence from m s. ltd to the appellants. in the present case we are concerned with the retrospective effect of the certificate issued by the registrar of trade marks on 30 6 2000 with effect from 30 9 91. in the circumstances the judgment of this court in the case of bigen industries 2006 indlaw sc 546  supra  has no application. for the aforestated reasons we do not find any merit in these civil appeals. before concluding we may point out that we do not wish to express any opinion on the subsequent events which have taken place in this case. our judgment is confined only to the period in question under the impugned show cause notices.

[Facts] this appeal by special leave is directed against order dated 13 7 2005 passed by the division bench of the bombay high court. dismissing letter patents appeal preferred by the appellant against the order of the learned single judge who dismissed his writ petition and confirmed the orders passed by the state minister for revenue in the proceeding r t s 3402  pra kra 309 l 6 dated 18th october 2002. the facts in brief as narrated in the impugned order are that survey nos 118 328 and 351 of lonavala were originally owned by one haji habib tar mohammed janu. the said haji habib tar mohammed janu migrated to pakistan and while going to pakistan he sold his property to one smt. hajrabi haji yusuf on 4 6 1949 however this transaction was cancelled by the collector and custodian of evacuee property on 17 4 1949 as per section 8 i  of the evacuee properties act and these lands were accordingly entered as evacuee property by the tahsildar maval on 26 10 1949 it appears that these survey numbers were also given c t s no 129 130 a 130 b and 133. it appears that in cts no 129 130 a 130 b and 133 apart from vacant land there is a bungalow no 52 habib villa. it appears that the regional settlement commissioner placed this property for auction through government auctioner and one gulabbai desaipurchased the said property in auction for a consideration of rs 16 750  on 17 5 1956 and accordingly sale certificate was issued by the regional settlement commissioner bombay on behalf of the government. in the said sale certificate the c t s no 129 130 a 130 b and 133 of village lonavala were mentioned. the area of this cts nos were as under. on the basis of the said sale certificate the mutation entry no 1836 was effected in the village record in favour of gulabai desai and thereby her name was entered in survey nos 118 1b and 328 of village lonavala to the extent of 29 30 ares and 70 ares respectively. thereafter gulabai sold cts no 133 admeasuring 33 gunthas on 24 4 1977 to respondent no 3 genu kadu. the said gulabai also gifted her remaining area from this survey numbers to her grandson anil gajanan desai on 15 1 1979 who in turn has sold his properties to respondent no 2. prem hasmatraj lalwani in the year 1980. the survey nos 118 2 and 351 being evacuee properties were allotted to the appellant in the year 1956 later on it was found that the appellant is in possession of more area and therefore the said order was modified on 6 5 1982 and excess area was granted to the appellant on payment of rs 31 360   which appellant had paid on 17 5 1982 in government treasury and thereby the deputy collector and assistant settlement commissioner pune granted the excess land to the appellant and thereafter the dispute started between the parties. in the impugned order division bench made it clear that since the dispute between the parties was in respect of the area as to what has been purchased in auction sale by gulabai desai and what is the area allotted to the appellant by the orders of the deputy collector and deputy custodian of evacuee properties the appellant requested the bench not to enter into the merits on this question in this lpa since the parties may prosecute their remedies in the civil court for such adjudication and therefore that aspect was not considered by the high court. however in the facts of the conflicting claims the appellant made grievance to the deputy collector and the deputy custodian of evacuee properties in respect of the mutation made in favour of the respondent gulabai and other respondents and therefore by order dated 18 9 1984 the deputy collector and deputy custodian of evacuee properties pune directed the sub divisional officer haveli sub division to take up the case in revision under section 257 of maharashtra land revenue code and pass necessary orders. in view of these directions the sub divisional officer haveli sub division pune initiated proceeding rts revision 14 of 1984 and by order dated 30 7 1985 cancelled the mutation entry no 1836 which comprises land admeasuring 7897 sq yards and directed necessary corrections in the record as per the observations made in the order. it appears that the said order was taken in appeal by the respondent and the matter was remanded to the sub divisional officer. after remand the sub divisional officer conducted inquiry and again passed an order on 29 10 1987 and confirmed the earlier order. therefore the rts appeal no 128 of 1987 was preferred before the collector which was disposed off by the additional collector on 13 7 1993 by the said order the order of the third sub divisional officer was maintained. however further inquiry as directed by the sdo was to be conducted. since the mutation entry no 1836 was cancelled by above order the talathi gave effect to these orders and effected the mutation entry no 2176 and showed the disputed properties in the name of the collector and deputy custodian of evacuee properties. the directions were issued by the collector to the tahsildar to place the appellant in possession of the property as per the orders of the deputy collector and the deputy custodian of evacuee properties. however instead of giving effect to those orders it appears that the revenue officers at tahsil level effected two mutations viz mutation no 2377 and 2394 by mutation entry no 2377 the name of respondent was again mutated in the record and by the mutation entry no 2394 the name of genu kadu was mutated in the record. since the collector noticed on complaint that the orders of the collector has been bypassed or surpassed by the subordinate revenue officers the collector by order dated 12 7 1999 directed the sdo to take these mutations namely mutation entry no 2377 and 2394 in revision and therefore the sub divisional officer maval division has taken these mutations in revision bearing rts revision no 12 of 1999 the said revision was decided by the sub divisional officer at maval on 28 1 2000 and those mutations were cancelled. being aggrieved by the order passed in the said revision respondent no 2 lalwani preferred rts appeal no 81 of 2000 and the respondent no 3 genu kadu preferred rts appeal no 114 of 2000 both. these rts appeals were heard by the additional collector pune and by order dated 28 5 2001 the addl. collector pune dismissed the said appeals and confirmed the order of the sub divisional officer maval. aggrieved by the said order of the additional collector respondent no 2 preferred rts revision no 330 of 2001 under section 257 of maharashtra land revenue code 1966 before the additional commissioner pune division pune. the said revision was decided by the additional commissioner pune by order dated 22 11 2001 and the said revision was dismissed. respondent no 2 challenged this order of the additional commissioner by filing the proceeding rts 3402 pra kra 309 l 6 by way of second revision before the revenue minister for state and the said proceeding was decided by the minister for state on 18 10 2002 the revenue minister allowed the said proceeding and set aside the orders passed by the sub divisional officer maval dated 28 1 2000 order dated 28 5 2001 of additional collector pune and of additional commissioner dated 22 11 2001 and thus restored the position as reflected by the mutation entries nos 1836 and 2377 and 2394 thus all the entries in favour of the respondents were protected and maintained by the order of the state minister for revenue. appellant challenged the order dated 19 10 2002 passed by the minister by filing a writ petition which was dismissed by learned single judge of the bombay high court. thereafter the appellant filed letters patent appeal which was also dismissed by the division bench holding that when the state minister for revenue entertained the matter he was possessed of jurisdiction under section 257 of the maharashtra land revenue code and therefore the order passed by him under the said authority is within his jurisdiction power and competence. hence the present appeal by special leave.
[Ratio of the decision] the only question that falls for consideration is as to whether a second revision under section 257 is maintainable and that whether the state government exceeds its jurisdiction in entertaining the second revision. from reading of the aforesaid provisions it is manifest that the state government makes appointment of the revenue officers including the commissioner and the chief controlling authorities in the revenue matters. section 5 makes it clear that the chief controlling authority in all matters connected with the land revenue in his division shall vest with the commissioner subject to superintendence directions and control of the state government. section 11 provides that all revenue officers shall be subordinate to the state government. it is therefore clear that in revenue matters the state government is the supreme revenue authority. in the present case we noticed the scheme of the code in the matters of hearing and disposal of appeals revision and review. a bare reading of the aforesaid provision would show that the provision uses the word  and  for state government but for other revenue officers. it uses the word  or  the language and the words used in the said provision suggest that jurisdiction of the state government is concurrent with the jurisdiction of other revenue officers in deciding the revision. hence even if one party goes to the commissioner in revision the state government can still be approached under section 257 for revision. the power of revision exercised by any revenue officer including the commissioner is a proceeding by a subordinate officer and the state government can satisfy itself as to the legality and propriety of any decision including the order passed in revision by the revenue officers. further in view of the fact that state government itself appoints the revenue officers including the commissioner under the scheme of the code and all revenue officers are subordinate to the state government as per section 11 of the act and even the chief controlling authority in all matters connected with the land revenue in his division is vested with the commissioner they are subject to the superintendence direction and control of the state government as provided under section 5 of the code. the aforesaid provision makes it clear that even if the decision is considered to be final the state government s power to call for and examine the record and proceedings of subordinate officers is saved. in other words the state government in exercise of its revisional as well as general power of superintendence and control can call for any record of proceedings and consider the legality and propriety of the orders passed by the revenue officers under section 247 or 257 of the code. from perusal of the entire scheme of the code including section 257 it is manifest that the revisional powers are not only exercisable by the state government but also by certain other revenue officers. there is nothing in the code to suggest that if these revisional powers are exercised by a revenue officer who has jurisdiction it cannot be further exercised by a superior revenue officer or by the state government. a fair reading of sections 257 and 259 suggests that if revisional powers are exercised by a revenue officer having jurisdiction to do so further revisional power can be exercised by the superior officer or by the state government.

[Facts] the respondent joined service as technical assistant with the gujarat state electricity board  hereinafter refined to as the board  he was promoted to the post of deputy engineer. while he was posted at surat as deputy engineer he was transferred to ukai subdivision under the order of the superintending engineer dated 29th march 1974 pursuant to the order of transfer he was relieved from his duties at surat on 30th march 1974 to enable him to join at ukai. he made representation to the additional chief engineer for cancelling his transfer order on the ground that his mother aged 70 years was ailing and it would cause great inconvenience to him if he was required to join at ukai. his representation was rejected and he was directed to join at ukai but he did not do so instead he filed a civil suit at baroda challenging validity of the order of transfer. meanwhile the chief engineer by his order dated 27th may 1974 discharged the respondent from service with effect from 31st march 1974 in accordance with service regulation no 113 the respondent challenged the validity of the order of his discharge from service by means of a writ petition under article 226 of the constitution before the high court of gujarat. a learned single judge of the high court quashed the order of termination on the findings that the order of discharge was issued m violation of the basic principles of natural justice as no opportunity was afforded to the respondent before discharging him from services under regulation no 113. the learned single judge granted a declaration in respondent s favour holding the order void and illegal but having regard to recalcitrant attitude of the appellant and his continued conduct of disobedience of the orders of his superior authorities he refused to grant consequential reliefs regarding reinstatement or payment of back wages. the respondent as well as the appellant board both preferred letters patent appeals against the order of learned single judge. a division bench of the high court dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellants but it allowed the respondent s appeal. the division bench upheld the order of the learned single judge holding the order of discharge illegal and void but it set aside the order of the learned single judge refusing to grant consequential relief instead it directed the appellants to reinstate the respondent and to treat him in service without any break in service and to grant him benefits of increments seniority and promotion to which he may be entitled under the rules. the bench however did not grant full back wages to the respondent instead it directed the board to pay him 50 per cent of back wages. aggrieved the appellant has preferred the instant appeal after obtaining special leave of this court. this appeal came up for hearing before us on 28th january 1988 and on that day. sh. b k mehta advocate appearing for the appellants and sh. vimal dave advocate appearing for the respondent were fully heard. after hearing learned counsel for the parties we were satisfied that the learned single judge as well as the division bench both had committed error in allowing the writ petition and granting relief to the respondent. we expressed our view in the court and suggested to mr. vimal dave counsel for the respondent that if he agreed the original writ petition of the respondent could be dismissed without directing him to refund the amount which he had already been paid by the appellants in pursuance to the orders of the high court and of this court as during the pendency of the appeal. the appellants were directed by means of interim order of this court to continue to pay salary to the respondent which was being paid to him regularly. the hearing was adjourned to enable sh. vimal dave to obtain instructions from the respondent. the appeal came up for hearing before us on 16 2 1988 when another counsel appeared to argue the appeal on behalf of the respondent on merits. the respondent s prayer is accordingly rejected and since oral hearing has already been completed and in spite of several adjournments respondent failed to appear before the court or to file the written submissions we proceed to decide the case on merits. he was relieved from his duties at surat on 30th march 1974. but he did not join at ukai till the impugned order of discharge was issued on may 27 1974 the. chief engineer who discharged the respondent s services exercised his power under service regulation no 113 which runs as under   113 the continued absence from duty or overstay m spite of warning to return to duty shall render the employee liable to summarily discharge from service without the necessity of proceedings under the gujarat electricity board conduct discipline and appeal procedure. the chief engineer discharged the respondent from service as he had continued to remain absent from duty w e f. march 30 1974 to may 27 1974. on march 29 1974 the superintending engineer of the board issued the order transferring the respondent from surat to ukai on 30 3 1974 the respondent was relieved from surat and directed to join his duty at ukai but the respondent did not join his duty at the new place of posting. instead he made a representation to the additional chief engineer on 8 4 1974 after the transfer order. the transfer order was not stayed and as the respondent did not join his duties he continued to be absent without sanction of any leave. in this situation the superintending engineer by his letter dated 18th april 1974 directed the respondent to show cause as to why action should not be taken against him for disobeying the order of transfer and also for unauthorised absence from duty in breach of service regulation. no 113 the letter is as under   gujarat electricity board o   m division nana varchha road surat. dated 18th april 1974. to shri a s pohani junior engineer ukai 37 gurunagar society near jakat naka surat 3. sub  transfer from surat to ukai. you have been relieved on 30 3 1974 a n on account of your transfer from surat to ukai but you have not reported to ukai till today and remained on unauthorised absence on relief which is breach of s r no 112 and 113 please submit your explanation as to why action should not be taken against you for disobeying order of superior and breach of s r no 112 and 113 within 7 days from receipt of this letter. sd  execut. ive engineer  o. m  surat copy f w c s to. superintending engineer geb utran. the establishment officer  p  of the board also informed the respondent by his letter dated may 6 1974 that his representation against the order of transfer was not accepted and he was directed to obey the order of transfer. a copy of the letter filed by the petitioner himself as annexure  k  to the writ petition in the high court. but even thereafter the respondent did not join his duties. ultimately the chief engineer of the board took action against the respondent and discharged him from service with effect from 31 3 1974 by his letter dated may 27 1974.
[Ratio of the decision] this appeal is directed against the judgment and order of the high court of gujarat dated 28 2 1986 allowing the respondent s writ petition and quashing order of discharge from service and directing his reinstatement in service. we refused to hear the counsel as we had already completed hearing. thereupon the respondent himself appeared in person and sought permission to make his submissions personally. we refused to accede to his request as oral heating had already been completed and the matter had been adjourned only to enable the respondent s counsel to obtain instructions. however in the interest of justice we permitted the respondent to file written submissions if any in support of his case. thereafter the case was listed several times but no written submissions were filed instead the respondent adopted an unusual course by sending an application by post expressing his no confidence in us with a prayer to transfer the case to some other bench. since this was unusual uncalled for and unjustified request we ignored the same and reserved the order. we are constrained to note that instead of utilizing the opportunity granted to him for filing written submissions the respondent has misused adjournments for the purposes of raising frivolous objections for getting the case transferred to some other bench. no party is entitled to get a case transferred from one bench to the other unless the bench is biased or there are some reasonable grounds for the same but no right to get a case transferred to any other bench can legitimately be claimed merely because the judges express opinion on the merits of the case on the conclusion of hearing. in the instant case on the conclusion of the oral hearing we had expressed our opinion on 28 1 1988 in the open court that we were inclined to allow the appeal and set aside the order of the high court and dismiss the writ petition but taking a sympathetic view we requested sh. vimal dave learned counsel appearing for the respondent to obtain instructions as aforesaid. the opportunity granted to the respondent has however been misused by raising mischievous and frivolous objections instead of filing written submissions. transfer of a government servant appointed to a particular cadre of transferable posts from one place to the other is an incident of service. no government servant or employee of public undertaking has legal tight for being posted at any particular place. transfer from one place to other is generally a condition of service and the employee has no choice in the matter. transfer from one place to other is necessary in public interest and efficiency in the public administration. whenever a public servant is transferred he must comply with the order but if there be any genuine difficulty in proceeding on transfer it is open to him to make representation to the competent authority for stay modification or cancellation of the transfer order. if the order of transfer is not stayed modified or cancelled the concerned public servant must carry out the order of transfer. in the absence of any stay of the transfer order a public servant has no justification to avoid or evade the transfer order merely on the ground of having made a representation or on the ground of his difficulty in moving from one place to the other. if he fails to proceed on transfer in compliance to the transfer order he would expose himself to disciplinary action under the relevant rules as has happened in the instant case. the respondent lost his service as he refused to comply with the order of his transfer from one place to the other. there is no dispute that the respondent was holding a transferable post and under the conditions of service applicable to him he was liable to be transferred and posted at any place within the state of gujarat. the respondent had no legal or statutory right to insist for being posted at one particular place. in fact during the tenure of his service in the board the respondent had been transferred from one place to another place several times. in march 1974 he was transferred  from surat to ukai. the distance between the two places as was stated before us during the hearing of the case is less than 50 kms. the above rule provides that if an employee of the gujarat electricity board continues to remain absent from duty or overstays the period of sanctioned leave and in spite of warning he fails to return to duty he renders himself liable to be discharged summarily from service without complying with the procedure prescribed for taking disciplinary action under the gujarat electricity board conduct discipline and appeal procedure. regulation 113 confers wide powers on the authorities to summarily discharge an employee from service if he continues to be absent from duty in an unauthorised manner and refuses to join his duty even after warning. under the disciplinary rules detailed procedure is required to be followed for removing an employee from service but regulation 113 provides for summary discharge from service. before this power is exercised two conditions must be satisfied  firstly the employee must be found to be absent from duty without leave or overstaying the period of sanctioned leave and secondly he failed to join his duty even after a warning. the object and purpose of giving warning is to remind the delinquent employee that if he continues to be absent from duty he would be liable to action under regulation 113 and to afford him an opportunity to make amends by joining his duty. if even thereafter he fails to join duty his services are liable to be terminated by an order of discharge. it is noteworthy that the validity of regulation 113 was not challenged before the high court and the parties proceeded on the assumption that regulation 113 was valid and applicable to the respondent s service. on perusal of the material on record we are of the opinion that the view taken by the high court is not sustainable as there is sufficient material on record which shows that warning had been issued to the respondent before the order of discharge was issued. in determining the question whether any warning was given to the respondent it is necessary to refer to the sequence of events and the correspondence which ensued between the appellants and the respondent. there is no dispute that the respondent received the aforesaid letter as he sent a reply to the superintending engineer on april 20 1974 a copy of which was annexed as annexure  j  by the petitioner to his petition before the high court. by that letter respondent stated that he was waiting for the decision of his representation made for reconsideration of his transfer from surat to ukai and therefore the question of his remaining on unauthorised leave was misconceived. since the respondent had not obtained any sanctioned leave for his absence his absence from duty was unauthorised. no government servant or employee of any public undertaking has a right to be absent from duty without sanction of leave merely on account of pendency of representation against the order of transfer. since the respondent continued to be absent from duty the superintending engineer by a registered post acknowledgment due letter dated april 24 1974 informed the respondent that his request to postpone his transfer was rejected and he was directed to join his duty at ukai and on his failure to do so disciplinary action would be taken against him. the sequence of events and the correspondence which ensued between the officers of the board and the respondent clearly show that the respondent disobeyed the order of transfer and he remained absent from duty in an unauthorised manner without obtaining sanction of leave. the aforesaid documents leave no room for any doubt that the respondent was reminded of his failure to join his duties at ukai and he was further reminded that his unauthorised absence had exposed him to disciplinary action. in fact the superintending engineer had by his letter dated 18th april 1974 clearly reminded the respondent that his unauthorised absence was in breach of service regulation no 113 and called upon to show cause why action should not be taken against him but in spite of these letters the respondent failed to join his duties. this finding is wholly misconceived. a warning need not be in any particular form. the object and purpose of the warning as contemplated by the regulation  is to remind the delinquent employee that his continued unauthorised absence from duties was liable to result in discharge of his service. the substance of the superintending engineer s letter dated 18th april 1974 which was admittedly served on the respondent contained warning to the respondent which fully met the requirement of regulation no 113. before the high court a controversy was raised as to whether the registered letter dated 24 4 1974 addressed by the superintending engineer to the respondent was received by him or not. the registered cover containing the letter dated 24 4 1974 was returned back by the postal authorities with an endorsement that the addressee refused to accept the same. the respondent s case was that no such registered letter was tendered to him by the postman nor he ever refused to accept the same. we do not agree with the view taken by the division bench. firstly even if the letter dated 24 4 1974 was not served on the respondent there is no dispute that the superintending engineer s letter dated 18th april 1974 had been served on him. by that letter warning as contemplated by regulation no 113 had been issued to the respondent. therefore even if the letter dated 24 4 1974 was not served on the respondent the order of discharge as contemplated by regulation no 113 is sustainable in law. but even otherwise the division bench committed error in holding that the board had raised the question of service of the letter dated 24 4 1974 for the first time before the division bench in the letters patent appeal. perusal of the averments made in paragraphs 17 18 23 and 25  2  ii  of the counter affidavit filed in reply to the petitioner s writ petition before the learned single judge shows that the board had categorically pleaded that the respondent was informed by letter dated 24 4 1974 that his representation to postpone his transfer was rejected and he should obey the order of transfer. it was further pleaded that the respondent had refused to accept the registered letter and the same had been returned back by the postal authorities with an endorsement that the addressee refused to accept the same. in his rejoinder affidavit the respondent denied the aforesaid allegations and asserted that the letter was not tendered to him and he never refused to accept the registered cover and the postal endorsement was wrong and incorrect. apart from denying the postal endorsement the respondent placed no material before the court in support of his pleading. in this view we are of the opinion that the division bench was totally wrong in holding that no opportunity was afforded to the respondent to meet the case set up by the board that the letter dated 24 4 1974 was served on the respondent. no new plea had been raised by the board before the division bench instead the plea relating to service of the aforesaid letter had already been before the learned single judge. there is presumption of service of a letter sent under registered cover if the same is returned back with a postal endorsement that the addressee refused to accept the same. no doubt the presumption is rebuttable and it is open to the party concerned to place evidence before the court to rebut the presumption by showing that the address mentioned on the cover was incorrect or that the postal authorities never tendered the registered letter to him or that there was no occasion for him to refuse the same. the burden to rebut the presumption lies on the party challenging the factum of service. in the instant case the respondent failed to discharge this burden as he failed to place material before the court to show that the endorsement made by the postal authorities was wrong and incorrect. mere denial made by  the respondent in the circumstances of the case was not sufficient to rebut the presumption relating to service of the registered cover. we are therefore of the opinion that the letter dated 24 4 1974 was served on the respondent and he refused to accept the same. consequently the service was complete and the view taken by the high court is incorrect. the respondent acted in an irresponsible manner in not complying with the order of transfer which led to his discharge from service in accordance with the service regulation. no 113 the learned single judge as well as the division bench both erred in law in setting aside the order of discharge.

[Facts] the facts of the case in brief are that in view of the chinese invasion air field at sirsa required to be extended for which purpose the ministry of defence  govt. of india took steps to acquire some lands of agriculturists pursuant to which a notification dated november 27  1962 was issued under section 4 of the land acquisition act 1894 for acquiring 51 79 acres of land situated in the state of ahmedpur. on the next day another notification was issued under section 6 of the land acquisition act on november 28  1962 and in view of the emergency action under section 17 was taken for obtaining possession of the land with a view to its development. the lands which were acquired belonged to several land holders including moti ram and p w  12 kewal chand. the collector gave his award on 26 2 63 in respect of these lands  which actually measured 49 47 acres  at rs. 1350 per acre amounting to rs. 66 784 50 np. apart from this amount compensation was also awarded for standing crop amounting to rs. 11 073 13. np. the case of the prosecution initially was that after the land so acquired with the standing crop was taken possession of by the appellant. he sold the crop to moti ram and kewal chand for rs. 2500 and facilitated the cutting and taking away of the crop by postponing the handing over of the possession to the contractor till the 5th april 1963 and misappropriated the money. in respect of this allegation the first information report  ex  p  29  was issued on 14 1 64 in which the following statement is relevant. it is alleged that major som nath accused who is a garrison engineer sirsa air field subsequently sometime in the months of march and april 1963 permitted the removal of the standing crop valued at rs. 11073 13 by shri moti ram and kewal chand etc. after  accepting illegal gratification of rs  3000 from them. major som nath did not account for this amount in the govt. revenues. he thus  abused his position as a public servant and caused pecuniary advantage to said shri moti ram and kewal chand by giving them standing crops worth rs. 13 000 for a consideration of. rs. 3 000 only  which amount he accepted for his personal use and thereby also abused his official position and obtained pecuniary advantage  for himself in a sum of rs. a regular case  is therefore registered and entrusted to inspector baldev rai handa for investigation. after this f i r  certain statements were recorded by the military authorities being da to de dm  dm  1  dn   dl of mani gain  mulkh  raj  ganpat ram  telu ram  kewal chand and sukhchain lal jain. a chargesheet was filed against the appellant under section 5  1   c  and 5  1   d  read with 5  2  of the prevention of corruption act on 5 8 1966 after obtaining sanction from the govt. of india  ministry of home affairs on llth april  1966 as per ex  p 23. the accused was however convicted under the first charge for an offence under section 5 1  c  in that he being a garrison engineer incharge of the air field. sirsa and in that capacity entrusted with standing crops of sarson  gram and lusan on 30 acres of land a part of 49 acres of land acquired by the govt. and which had been valued at rs. 11 073 13 by the revenue authorities  dishonestly or fraudulently allowed moti ram of sirsa to misappropriate the said standing crop and thereby contravened section 5 1  c  of the prevention of corruption act punishable with section 5 2  of that act. against that conviction and sentence he  appealed to the high court which maintained the conviction and sentence. the sanction that has been accorded is in the following terms  11th april 1966. whereas it is alleged that major som nath       while functioning as garrison engineer  m e s   air field at sirsa from 13 2 63 to 54 1963 by corrupt or illegal means or by otherwise abusing his position  as such public servant  obtained pecuniary advantage of rs. 2500 for allowing the standing crops to be cut from the land acquired for the extension of air field. sirsa  and or he dishonestly or fraudulently realised and misappropriated rs. 2500 during the aforesaid period as the value of the crops cut from the land acquired for the extension of air field. sirsa  which crops had been entrusted to him as a public servant and he instead of depositing the said sale price into the govt. treasury converted it to his own use  and whereas the said acts of major som nath   constituted offences punishable under section 5 2  of the prevention of corruption act  read with section 5  1   c  and  d. act no  11 of 1947  of the said act and section 409 of the i p c. and whereas the central govt. after fully and carefully examining the materials before it in regard to the said allegations and circumstances of the case  consider that major som nath       should be prosecuted in a court of law for the said offences. now therefore  the central govt both hereby accord sanction under section 197 code of criminal procedure  act no  5 of 1898  and section 6 1  a  of the prevention of corruption act  1947  act ii of 1947  for the prosecution of maj. som nath for the said offences and for any other offences punishable under the provision of law in respect of the aforesaid acts by the court of competent jurisdiction. by order and in the name of the president  sd    a  p  veera raghavan. deputy secretary to the govt. of india. on the 6th april  1963 he has again written to the garrison engineer saying as follows. you have verbally asked me now to take the site after the crop is cut and the necessary marking of the alignment has been taken in hand but this handing over has not been shown on the site order book by the a g e   b r  despite my request. he may please be asked to complete this formality without any loss of time. in reply the appellant states in his letter ex. p  12 dated the 10th april. the matter has already been discussed with you and finalised. no further action is required to be taken.
[Ratio of the decision] this appeal is by special leave against the judgment of the high court of punjab and haryana confirming the conviction of the accused under section 5 1  c  of the prevention of corruption act 1947 as also the sentence awarded by the sessions judge of one year s rigorous imprisonment and a fine of rs. 2500  in default six months rigorous imprisonment. before we consider these contentions it is necessary to determine another submission of the learned advocate for the appellant which goes to the root of the jurisdiction of the court to try the offence  under section 5 1  c. if this contention is valid then the conviction of the accused cannot stand and therefore it is necessary to deal with this matter first. it may be mentioned that though a complaint was made in the application for a certificate for leave to appeal to this court that the learned single judge of the high court should have acquitted the appellant on the sole ground that there was no proper sanction for the prosecution of the appellant under section 5 1   c  of the prevention of the corruption act  this question does not seem to have been urged before the high court. in any case we do not think that there is any validity in the submission. that the sanction given by the govt. of india does not cover the trial of the charge under section 5 1  c  of the prevention of corruption act. for a sanction to be valid it must be established that the sanction was given in respect of the facts constituting the offence with which the accused is proposed to be charged. though it is desirable that the facts should be referred to in the sanction itself  nonetheless if they do not appear on the face of it  the prosecution must establish aliunde by evidence that those facts were placed before the sanctioning authorities. it is therefore necessary to first examine the order of sanction to ascertain on what facts it has been accorded. from the above order it is apparent that the facts which the central govt. considered for the purposes of according sanction were  a  that the appellant as a public servant was entrusted with crops situated on the land acquired for the extension of air field  sirsa    b  that by abusing his position as a public servant he allowed the standing crops to be cut from the said land. c. that by corrupt or illegal means and by abusing his position as a public servant he obtained pecuniary advantage of rs. 2500 as the value of the crops to be cut from the land and or he dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriated that sum by converting it into his own use instead of depositing the said sale price in the govt. treasury. the question therefore would be whether these facts were sufficient to sustain the sanction under 5 1  c  even if the charge under 5 1  d  had failed. this question in turnwill depend upon what are the ingredients of the offences under 5 1  c  and  d  read with section 5 2. it would be seen therefore that under section 5 1  c  a public servant will be said to commit the offence of misconduct in hi  duties if he dishonestly allows any other persons to convert to his own use property which is entrusted to the said public servant the facts which have been set out in the order granting the sanction certainly are sufficient to indicate that the authorities granting the sanction had the offence under section 5 1  c  also in their contemplation. in fact the order specifically mentions thisprovision while granting sanction. we should have thought this was an obvious conclusion but the learned advocate for the appellant strenuously contended that the charge against the appellant was of a motiveless offenceand in any case the facts as disclosed show that not only at thetime when the first information report was given but even at the time when sanction was accorded that the prosecution wag merely concerned with the charge that the appellant bad allowed the crops to be cut on the condition that rs  2500 will be paid and received the money and misappropriated or converted it tohis own use by not paying it into the govt. treasury. there is therefore no basis for sanction for a charge under section 5 1  c. if so a charge under section 5 1  c  would implicate those persons also in the commission of an offence which certainly would not have  been in the contemplation of the authorities granting the sanction. in support of this contention three decisions have been cited before us namely bhagat ram v  state of punjab  1954 indlaw sc 188  madan mohan singh v  state of u  p   privy council 82. and gokulchand dwarkadas mordrka v  the king   1948 indlaw pc 39. we do not see how this case can assist the appellant because in the first ace there is no question of an alteration  of the charge and secondly the circumstance that someone who is not a public servant abetted the appellant is hardly relevant. but even so the offence with which the appellant is charged under section 5 1  c  does not necessarily involve  an abetment with the person whom he had dishonestly allowed to  cut and take away the crop. for instance it is quite possible that the person whom he allowed to cut the crop may be his own relation or friend in whom he may be interested and who may  however  not know that the accused was doing something dishonest in permitting him to cut the crop. in any case the facts which have been stated  in the sanction clearly indicate that the appellant has dishonestly allowed the crops to be cut so that there is no question of any inference or implication that the persons cutting the crops were abetting him in the offence. even if it were so the sanction cannot be held to be had on that account. these cases instead of supporting the contention of the learned advocate amply demonstrate that the facts which formed the basis of the sanction and which was accorded after the sanctioning authority had fully applied its mind to them  should be correlated to the particular offence or offences with which the accused is charged or convicted. in our view there is no justification for holding that the conviction under section 5 1  c  read with 5 2  is bad for want of the requisite sanction. now on the merits of the case as we said earlier the learned advocate for the appellant has referred to the evidence in meticulous detail and has commented thereon  at length but this court ordinarily does not reappropriation the evidence with a view to arriving at its own finding as if it was a court of fact and does not ordinarily upset the findings of the high court which has on an evaluation of the evidence affirmed the trial court s conviction and sentence. it has been contended firstly that the high court was in error in relying on certain evidence for convicting the accused which was not put to him. secondly the evidence that was necessary to unfold the story of the prosecution has not been produced by the prosecution but the trial court and the high court ignored this lacunas in the prosecution case. thirdly the judgments show that there was utter confusion in respect of the date on which possession of the acquired land was given to the appellant and the date on which it was given to the contractor for carrying on the work  as also in respect of the fact whether there was any crop standing when the appellant took possession of the land and at what period of time the crop was cut and the work commenced. before we deal with the contentions urged on behalf of the appellant it is necessary to have a clear picture of certain broad features of the case. the air strip which was being extended is in one straight line with taxi ways. p w 14 ranadive tells us that if one were to go from the entrance of air field to the acquired land one would have to pass through rd 4500 to 1200. the acquired land extended from rd 1200 to rd 00. according to p w  8 telu ram  he acquired possession of the land of the length from rd 4500 to rd 1200 on 10th january 1963 and that tile possession of the acquired land was not delivered to him as it had not been acquired by that time. ex. do review report which is headed technical administration contract shows that the date of review was 9th february 1963. in this document the date of the conclusion of the contract is given as 3rd december 62 and date of commencement of work as 10th january 63  date of completion of 1st phase 9th october   63 and second phase 9th may 1964. to the question  have all sites  been handed over on due date  the answer shown  was an affirmative  yes. there is however nothing in this document to show what is the site of  which possession was handed over to and taken by telu ram on 10th january  63. it is not the case of the appellant that acquisition of the land on which the crop was standing had taken place nor could possession of it been handed over to him because he denies that there was any crop on the land when the possession of the land was handed over to him. that there was crop on  the land is amply born out by a letter of the appellant dated 12th february 1963 addressed to mr  g  l  nagpal  sub divisional magistrate  sirsa. in this letter he says     12th feb  1963. my dear mr  nagpal  i am writing to you with regard to. acquisition of land for sirsa airfield. as  you know. the additional deputy commissioner  hissar will be visiting his location on 13th feb  1963. the military estates officer  delhi  mr  k  k  gamkhar will also be here on 13th morning. it is desirable that entire proceedings with regard to acquisition of land and determining compensation for standing crops for the total area of 39 58 acres in mirpur and ahmadpur villages tire finalised an this date. as i have told you personally  we are keen to finalise the proceedings for the total area to be acquired by us and not by phses. this is interest of the project. i therefore request you to issue suitable instructions to  your staff so that all the relevant papers may be suitably prepared. even if exhibit dq gave a correct picture  it could be in relation to the airstrip already in existence  as this would be necessary for a contractor who is charged with duty to carry out extension work to go on the site collect materials and get everything ready to execute his contract. in fact as we have noticed earlier this is what telu ram says in his evidence  namely that on loan january 63 no delivery of possession of the remaining land other than rd 4500 to 1200  the land in which there is the existing run way  was given. it was then that he wrote on 23 1 1963 as per ex  8 to the assistant garrison engineer complaining that the possession of the whole of the land had not been delivered to him. a copy of this letter was sent to the garrison engineer the appellant. this letter shows two things  a  that complete site 4500 to 0 ft  has not yet been handed over  as it was presumed that the possession of the land could not be had so for  and  b  that as levels have not been given  the final excavation of the foundation cannot be done and all subsequent operations are therefore withheld. this letter clearly indicates that some excavation was being done as otherwise there is no meaning in saying that final excavation cannot be done. this is also consistent with the other evidence that some work was in progress which gain is in accord with the evidence of telu ram p w  8 that he got the possession of rd 4500 to rd 1200. the extension of the airstrip would mean that the existing airstrip is being extended  so that the initial work can be started and continued on the existing airstrip. it is not as if the existing airstrip ends at the boundary of rd 4500 to rd 1200  so that the work of extension can go on in the existing airstrip even before possession of the acquired land was given. this is further confirmed by a perusal of the letter written by the appellant to telu ram p w  8 in reply to his letter dated 28th february 63  not produced  that  necessary possession of the  runway and taxi track has already been given to you. you are therefore requested to set out the work and get the same approved by the engineerin  charge before starting the work. this shows that no work had in fact been undertaken on the land acquired and also that possession of the existing runway and track had already been given. nothing is specifically mentioned about possession of the acquired land being given to him on that date. the work on that land is only at the stage of getting approval. now the next question is when was the possession of the acquired land obtained by the appellant and when did he deliver it to p w  8. p w  14  says that symbolic possession was delivered to him in respect of the acquired land on the 1st february 63. it would however appear from exh. p  24 that actual possession was delivered to the appellant on 13th february  63 as per the delivery receipt executed by him  the tehsildar and p w 11  a representative of the military estate office and that even according to his letter already referred to ex. p 13 there wag standing crop on the land. as otherwise there is no meaning in the appellant saying therein that it is desirable that entire proceedings with regard to acquisition of land and determining compensation for standing crops for  the  total area of 39  58 acres are finalised on the 13th february. there is also credible evidence that possession of the acquired land was not handed over to the contractor till late in  march  63 though  it was handed over to and  taken over by the appellant on 13 2 63. the khasra girdawari ex. p 3 would show that there was a crop of sargon  mustard  gram and lusan  at any rate on 20th march 63 at a time when the land has been shown therein to have been in possession of the military authorities. p  2 is a certified copy by the tehsildar dated 18 9 63 which shows that as per the girdawari on 20 3 63 crops were standing on the lands in the village ahmedpur acquired by the military authorities for sirsa 3 airfield construction  the details of which were that the total land acquired for airfield 49 acres  the land on which crops were standing in good condition 23 acres and the land on which crops were standing in damaged condition 7 acres and uncultivated land 19 acres. mani ram patwari had stated that by the 20th march 1963 some ground had been cleared. sukhchain lal jain p w  11 who had also come to obtain possession on behalf of the military estate officer had said that he had seen some part of the crops had been cut by 13 2 1963  but was not aware who had cut them. this evidence  however  does not assist the accused. at the most it shows that a small portion of the crops were cut but it is apparent that that has not been taken into account by the collector in assessing the value of the crop because it is on that day that crops were inspected for that purpose and subsequently the agricultural officer also had in his letter dated 18 2 63  which has been cited in the award ex. p  26 intimated that on inspection the crops were found to be very good. he had also given the approximate yield and the rate at which the crop can be valued with which the collector agreed and awarded compensation. it is therefore clear that in estimating the crop  the small portion of the land where crops were stated to have been cut by the 13 2 63 even if true could not have been taken into account. it may also be stated that the contractor had written to the  garrison engineer on 28 2 63 requesting him to hand over immediately the possession of the remaining portion of the land so that excavation work is not held up. he also inform in that letter that the excavation in all available portions of the taxi track and runway has been completed. this again does not specifically refer to the land which is being acquired. at any rate on the 23rd march  1963 p w  8 has again written to the garrison engineer namely the appellant that the excavation of the taxi track could not be proceeded with for want of alignment to be given which was pending for want  because  of standing crops  in the land  the possession of which has not been given so far. thereafter the following pertinent statement appears namely   now  today i find that the crops have been completely cut and as such it is requested that further necessary action in the matter of giving the alignment and possession of land may please be taken at your end. it can be seen from the above that the appellant is reluctant to reply in writing as to what he is asking the contractor to do under verbal orders while the contractor for safeguarding his position is insisting on having it in writing. the trial court as well as the high court are in our view  justified in holding that crops of sarson  gram and lusan were standing on the land acquired by the military for extension of the aerodrome. it will also justify the conclusion that they were there at any rate till the 20th march 1963 and according to the letter of the contractor  p w  8  on 23 3 63 they were completely cut. in so far as handing over of the possession of the land to the contractor  p w  8  is concerned  the trial court and the high court are equally justified in coming to the conclusion that the accused had not delivered the possession of the land to the contractor till quite late as would appear from the letter of p w  8 dated the 5th april  1963. we are aware of the argument addressed before us that some of the witnesses had said that the water channels had been closed in february 1963 and therefore no crop could thereafter have been standing on the land and must have been destroyed. there is also the further argument that some of the statements recorded by the military authorities were not taken into account  as the high court had thought that since the deponents denied the contents the officers who recorded the statement might have been called to show that they were properly recorded. the learned advocate for the respondent also tried to support the stand taken by the high court. it 1is true that when a witness has admitted having signed his previous statements that is enough to prove that some statement of his was recorded and he had appended his signature thereto. the only question is  what use can be made of such statements even where the witness admits having signed the statements made before the military authorities. if it is intended to  contradict the   witness by the writing  the attention of the witness should be called before the writing can be proved to those parts of it which are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him. if this is not done  the evidence of the witnesses cannot be assailed in respect of those statements by merely proving that the witness had signed the document. when the witnesses are contradicted by their previous statements in the manner aforesaid  then that part of the statements which has been put to the witness will be considered along with the evidence to assess the worth of the witness in determining his veracity. the whole of the previous statement however cannot be treated as substantive evidence. we do not find that the assessment of the evidence by the trial court and the high court even in the light of such of those previous statements that have been put to the witnesses in the manner stated above is in any way unjustified. it is said that some of the documents i e  ex  8  10 and 11 have not been put to the witnesses even though the court relied upon them. p 8. as already noticed is the letter of telu ram jain to the assistant garrison engineer and p  10 is the letter of telu ram jain to the garrison engineer. both these related to possession of the acquired land not being given to him. in the examination of the accused under section 342 the special judge in our view did put all the circumstances against the accused which formed the basis of the conviction. he was asked about the symbolic delivery of possession  the handing over of the actual possession of the land on 13 2 63 and the existence of crops on the date when possession was delivered on 16 2  63. he was asked about telu ram s evidence and also that he had given possession of the land rd 1200 to rd 00 to the contractor after the crop had been cut. the letter ex  p  13 was also put to him and he was asked about the existence of the crops. it cannot  therefore be said that circumstances appearing against the accused which have formed the basis of the conviction had not been put to him. the appellant has denied that there was any standing crop on the land acquired on any date after 13 2 63. on the other hand  he emphatically asserted that at the time when the possession was delivered to him on 13 2 63 there was also no crops standing on the acquired land. this statement is clearly false as it is against credible documentary evidence at a time when there was no possibility of any charge being levied against the appellant. it is also incorrect because the  contractor did not work on the acquired land since 1 2  63 that position is reflected in the review report initiated by the a g e  on 9 2 63  vide ex  dq. the appellant s statement is therefore belied by the documentary evidence which shows unmistakably that there was on 13 2 63 bumper crops of different varieties standing on the land which was valued thereafter and compensation assessed. we do not therefore think that there is any justification in the criticism that circumstances appearing in the several documents have not been put to him. as the learned advocate for the respondent rightly pointed out with reference to each one of the persons who  it was claimed  should have been called  that there was already evidence relating to the particular matter about which the person specified was sought to be called. for instance  it is said that gamkhar  military estate officer was not produced to prove the receipt ex. p  24. but this was not necessary because gamkhar was not present nor did he sign the receipt. the person who had signed the receipt is sukhchain lal jain and he was examined as p w  11. similarly  it is said that the tehsildar n  l  handa has not been produced. but when the prosecution relies upon the proof of ex. p  24 as also to establish that there was standing crops on the land when the possession was delivered on 13 2 63 on certain witnesses who were present on the respective occasions. the nonexamination of other witnesses without anything more cannot be treated as defect in the prosecution. before the high court also this grievance was aired but that court also likewise found no justification in it. we are therefore not impressed with this argument.

[Facts] this appeal by special leave which is directed against the judgment and order dated april 24 1974 of the letters patent bench of the high court of judicature at madras reversing the judgment and order dated april 19 1971 of the single judge of that court passed in writ petition no 3822 of 1969 presented u art 226 of the constitution raises a complex but an interesting question relating to the construction of the phrases  maternity benefit        for the period of her actual absence immediately preceding and including the day of her delivery and for the six weeks immediately following that day  occurring in s 5 1  of the maternity benefits act 1961. act liii of 1961   hereinafter referred to as  the act   which in view of s 2 1  of the act is the law applicable even to women workers employed in plantations. it appears that in october 1967 subbammal respondent no 2 herein who is a woman worker employed in mount stuart estate  hereinafter referred to as  the establishment   which is carrying on plantation industry was allowed leave of absence by the establishment on the basis of a notice given by her of her expected delivery which actually took place on december 16 1967 after her delivery the respondent was paid by her employers on account of maternity benefit an amount equivalent to what she would have earned on the basis of her average daily wage in 72 working days falling within twelve week s of the maternity period. while calculating the aforesaid amount of maternity benefit the establishment admittedly excluded twelve sundays being wageless holidays which fell during the period of the respondent s actual absence immediately preceding and including the day of her delivery and the six weeks immediately following that day. dissatisfied with this computation the respondent made a representation to her employers claiming maternity benefit for the entire period of twelve weeks under the act i e for 84 days on the plea that a week consisted of seven days. as her demand did not evoke a favourable response the respondent applied to the labour court coimbatore under section 33c 2  of the industrial disputes act for redress of her grievance. the claim preferred by the respondent was resisted by the appellant herein who contended that the respondent was admittedly working and was being paid only for six days in a week and that a pregnant woman worker is entitled to maternity benefit for 72 days which are the normal working days in twelve weeks and not for 84 days as no wage is payable for the seventh day of the week i e. sunday which is a nonworking wageless holiday. by its order dated february 26 1969 the labour court allowed the claim of the respondent. thereupon the establishment moved the high court at madras u. art 226 of the constitution challenging the decision of the labour court. contending that the claim made by the respondent was untenable as normally a worker works only for six days in a week and the maternity benefit had to be computed only for 72 days. as against this the respondent pleaded that the computation had to be made not with reference to the actual number of working days but with reference to total number of days covered by twelve weeks i e 84 days. the single judge of the high court to whom the case was assigned allowed the petition holding that twelve weeks for which maternity benefit is provided for in subs  3  of s 5 of the act must be taken to mean twelve weeks of work and the computation of the benefit had to be made with reference to the actual days on which the woman would have worked but for her inability. aggrieved by this decision the respondent filed an appeal u cl 15 of the letters patent which as already stated was allowed by the letters patent bench of the high court observing that the maternity benefit which the respondent was entitled to receive was for the period of her absence before delivery including the day of delivery and also six weeks thereafter each week consisting of seven days including sundays. dissatisfied with this decision the establishment has already stated come up in appeal to this court by special leave. we have heard mr. pai learned counsel for the appellant as also mr. bhatt who in view of the default in appearance of respondent no 2 and the importance of the point involved in the case was appointed as amicus cruaie. we place on record our deep appreciation of the valuable assistance rendered to us by both of them.
[Ratio of the decision] cochin v. for a proper determination of the question involved in the appeal it would we think be useful to refer to certain provisions of the act which have a bearing on the subject matter of the controversy before us. the above definition it would be noted does not restrict the meaning of the term  wages  to contractual wages but gives the term a composite meaning covering all remunerations in the nature of cash allowances incentive bonus and the money value of the concessional supply of foodgrains and other articles. the provisions of s 5 of the act quoted above make it clear that a woman worker who expects a child is entitled to maternity benefit for a maximum period of twelve weeks which is split up into two periods viz prenatal and post natal. the first one i e prenatal or ante natal period is limited to the period of woman s actual absence extending upto six weeks immediately preceding and including the day on which her delivery occurs and the second one which is postnatal compulsory period consists of six weeks immediately following the day of delivery. the benefit has to be calculated for the aforesaid two periods on the basis of the average daily wage. for fixing the average daily wage it has therefore first to be ascertained whether the wages with were paid or were payable to the woman was for  time work  or for  piece work  it has next to be ascertained as to what were the cash wages paid or payable to her in terms of the definition contained in s 3  n  of the act for the days on which she worked during the period of three calendar months immediately preceding the date of delivery reckoned according to the british calendar month. the total wages thus worked out are to be divided by the number of days in the aforesaid three calendar months in order to arrive at the average daily wage. after thus finding out the average daily wage the liability of the employer in respect of the maternity benefit has to be calculated in terms of s 5 of the act for both ore natal and post natal period indicated above. the real though difficult question that calls for determination by us is as to what is the connotation of the term  week  occurring in sub ss  1  and  3  of s 5 of the act and whether the computation of the maternity benefit prescribed by the act for the a foresaid two periods has to be made taking a  week  as signifying a cycle of seven days including a sunday or a cycle of seven days minus a sunday which is said to be a wageless day as the act does not contain any definition of the word  week  it has to be understood in its ordinary dictionary sense. in the shorter oxford english dictionary  third edition  the word  week  has been described as meaning  the cycle of seven days recognized in the calendar of the jews and thence adopted in the calendars of christian mohammedan and various other peoples. a space of seven days irrespective of the time from which it is reckoned. seven days as a term for periodical payments  of wager  rent or the like  or as a unit of reckoning for time of work or service. in webster s new world dictionary  1962 edition  the meaning of the word  week  is given as  a period of seven days especially one beginning with sunday and ending with saturday  the hours or days of work in a seven day period. in stroud s judicial dictionary  third edition  it is stated that  1   though a week usually means any consecutive seven days it will sometimes be interpreted to mean the ordinary notion of a week reckoning from sunday to sunday and  2  probably a week usually means seven clear days. a  week  according to halsbury s laws of england. third edi tion  volume 37 at p 84 is strictly the time between midnight on saturday and the same hour on the next succeeding saturday but the term is also applied to any period of seven successive days. bearing in mind the above mentioned dictionary or popular meaning of the term. week  we think that in the context of sub ss  1  and  3  of s 5 of the act the term has to be taken to signify a cycle of seven days including sundays. the language in which the aforesaid sub s s are couched also shows that the legislature intended that computation of maternity benefit is to be made for the entire period of the woman worker s actual absence i e for all the days including sundays which may be wageless holidays falling within that period and not only for intermittent periods of six days thereby excluding sundays falling within that period for if it were not so the legislature instead of using the words  for the period of her actual absence immediately preceding and including the day of her delivery and for the six weeks immediately following that day  would have used the words  for the working days falling within the period of her actual absence immediately preceding and including the day of her delivery and the six weeks immediately following that day but excluding the wageless days  again the word  period  occurring in s 5 1  of the act is a strong word. it seems to emphasize in our judgment the continuous running of time and recurrence of the cycle of seven days. it has also to be borne in mind in this connection that in interpreting provisions of beneficial pieces of legislation like the one in hand which is intended to achieve the object of doing social justice to women workers employed in the plantations and which squarely fall within the purview of art 42 of the constitution the beneficent rule of construction which would enable the woman worker not only to subsist but also to make up her dissipated energy nurse her child preserve her efficiency as a worker and maintain the level of her previous efficiency and output has to be adopted by the court. in view of what we have stated above we cannot uphold the view of the law expressed by the full bench of kerala high court in malayalam plantations ltd. inspector of plantations mundakayam   ors 1974 indlaw ker 91  supra.

[Facts] these appeals arising out of a judgment and order dated 26 4 2000 passed in writ petition no 1188 of 1997 by the high court of madhya pradesh  indore bench  involving similar questions of law and fact were taken up for hearing together and are being disposed of by this common judgment. background facts. the appellant nos 1 and 2 are degree holders in civil engineering and appellant nos. 3 and 4 are diploma holders in civil engineering. they having come to learn that certain vacancies exist in the respondent  authority  applied therefor although no advertisement in that behalf was issued. the respondent authority appointed the appellants and posted them to an overseas project known as  indore habitat project  which was implemented through the agency of  overseas development authority   hereinafter referred to as  the oda    on daily wages. rs 63   per day for the degree holders and rs 52 50 per day for the diploma holders. on or about 17 3 1997  however  they began receiving a salary of rs 1500   per month. allegedly  from their salary  provident fund was being deducted. they were also being granted the benefit of leave. the said dispute was referred for adjudication of the labour court  indore  by the state of madhya pradesh on the following questions. proceedings before the tribunal. the parties filed their respective pleadings before the labour court and also adduced their respective evidences. the labour court on the basis of the materials produced before it arrived at the following findings   1. the appellants were appointed by the indore development authority. all the employees have been working in the establishment of the respondents for last 5 6 years. their work was satisfactory. work has been taken by the respondent from all the appellants except four. respondents had also mentioned in their claim that there was a proposal to hand over the colony of oda project to indore municipal corporation. the salary fixed by the commissioner was earlier given to all engineers and later on they were given the salary fixed by the collector. there is no difference in their work and the work of the employees of indore development authority. aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the said award  the respondent  authority herein filed a writ petition before the madhya pradesh high court  indore bench  which was marked as writ petition no 1188 of 1997. by reason of the impugned judgment dated 26 4 2000  the said writ petition was allowed.
[Ratio of the decision] a dispute arose as to whether all the appellants were employed for the purpose of the said project or the appellants in civil appeal no 337 of 2002 were appointed in the year 1991 by the authority for its own job. an industrial dispute was raised by the appellants herein as their services were not being regularized by the respondent. 1 whether non regularisation of the sub engineers  as per the listed enclosed  is valid and proper. if no  then to which relief they are entitled and what directions should be given to the employer. 2 whether it is valid and proper for not giving equal salary to these sub engineers like other sub engineers in accordance with the equal work. determination. the respondent authority is a state within the meaning of art. it is  therefore  constitutionally obliged to strictly comply with the requirements of arts. 14 and 16 thereof before making any appointment. it is also not in dispute that the respondent  authority has been constituted under madhya pradesh nagar tatha gram nibesh adhiniyam  1973  adhiniyam   s  47 whereof mandates that all appointments to the posts of officers and servants included in the state cadre mentioned in section 76 b of the development authority services must be made by the state government and the appointments to the posts of officers and servants included in the local cadre in the said services by the concerned town and country development authority. the proviso appended to s  47 of the adhiniyam further mandates that no post shall be created in any authority without the prior sanction of the state government. section 76b provides for constitution of development authorities service. it is also not in dispute that the state government in exercise of its rule making power conferred upon it u s. 85 of the adhiniyam has made rules known as  m p  development authority services  officers and servants  recruitment rules  1987. the posts of sub engineers in which the appellants were appointed. it is nobody s case  were sanctioned ones. concededly  the respondent authority before making any appointment neither intimated the employment exchange about the existing vacancies  if any  nor issued any advertisement in relation thereto. indisputably  the conditions precedent for appointment of the officers and servants of the authority  as contained in the service rules had not been complied with. the appointments of the appellants were  therefore  void ab initio being opposed to public policy as also violative of arts. 14 and 16 of the constitution of india. the question  therefore  which arises for consideration is as to whether they could lay a valid claim for regularization of their services. the answer thereto must be rendered in negative. regularisation cannot be claimed as a matter of right. an illegal appointment cannot be legalized by taking recourse to regularization. what can be regularized is an irregularity and not an illegality. the constitutional scheme which the country has adopted does not contemplate any backdoor appointment. a state before offering public service to a person must comply with the constitutional requirements of arts. 14 and 16 of the constitution. all actions of the state must conform to the constitutional requirements. a daily wager in absence of a statutory provision in this behalf would not be entitled to regularization. see state of u p    others vs. ajay kumar   1997  4 scc 88 1997 indlaw sc 833  jawaharlal nehru krishi viswa vidyalaya  jabalpur  m p  vs. bal kishan soni and others  1997  5 scc 86  1997 indlaw sc 928. no notification has been brought to our notice that the standard standing orders had been made applicable to the appellants. it is furthermore not in dispute that adhiniyam came into force in 1973. the statute  rules and regulations formed by the state govern the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the respondent. the terms of conditions of service contained in the 1973 act and the 1987 rules are not in derogation of the provisions contained in schedule appended to the 1961 act. the 1961 act provides for classification of employees in five categories. the 1973 act  as noticed hereinbefore  clearly mandates that all posts should be sanctioned by the state government and all appointments to the said cadre must be made by the state government alone. even the appointments to the local cadre must be made by the authority. the said provisions were not complied with. it is accepted that no appointment letter was issued in favour of the appellants. had the appointments of the appellants been made in terms of the provisions of the adhiniyam and rules framed thereunder  the respondent authority was statutorily enjoined to make an offer of appointment in writing which was to be accepted by the appellants herein. who made the appointments of the appellants to the project or other works carried on by the authority is not known. whether the person making an appointment had the requisite jurisdiction or not is also not clear. we have noticed hereinbefore that in the case of om prakash mondloi  the ceo made an endorsement to the effect that he may be tried in daily wages and should be entrusted with the work of progress collection of oda work. the said order is not an  offer of appointment  by any sense of term. it may be true that the appellants had been later on put on a monthly salary but there is nothing on record to show as to how the same was done. they might have been subjected to the provisions of the employees provident fund and might have been granted the benefit of leave or given some employment code and their names might have found place in the seniority list amongst others  but thereby they cannot be said to have been given a permanent ticket. the so called seniority list which is contained in annexure p 27  whereupon strong reliance has been placed by dr  dhawan merely itself goes to show that it was prepared in respect of office muster employees. the said seniority list was not prepared in terms of the classification of employees within the meaning of the 1961 act and the rules framed there under but was based on the date of joining probably for the purpose of maintenance of records. the 1973 act or the rules framed there under do not provide for appointments on ad hoc basis or on daily wages. the 1961 act itself shows that the employees are to be classified in six categories  namely  permanent  permanent seasonal  probationers  badlies  apprentices and temporary. the recruitments of the appellants do not fall in any of the said categories. with a view to become eligible to be considered as a permanent employee or a temporary employee  one must be appointed in terms thereof. permanent employee has been divided in two categories  i  who had been appointed against a clear vacancy in one or more posts as probationers and otherwise  and  ii  whose name had been registered at muster roll and who has been given a ticket of permanent employee. a  ticket of permanent employee  was  thus  required to be issued in terms of order 3 of the standard standing orders. grant of such ticket was imperative before permanency could be so claimed. the appellants have not produced any such ticket. it is not the case of the appellants that they had been working as technical supervisors and clerks in respect of which service book may be maintained instead of issuance of a ticket. it is also not the case of the appellants that their names had appeared in the service book maintained for the said purpose. the standing orders governing the terms and conditions of service must be read subject to the constitutional limitations wherever applicable. constitution being the suprema lax  shall prevail over all other statutes. the only provision as regard recruitment of the employees is contained in order 4 which merely provides that the manager shall within a period of six months  lay down the procedure for recruitment of employees and notify it on the notice board on which standing orders are exhibited and shall send copy thereof to the labour commissioner. the matter relating to recruitment is governed by the 1973 act and the 1987 rules. in absence of any specific directions contained in the schedule appended to the standing orders  the statute and the statutory rules applicable to the employees of the respondent shall prevail. for the purpose of this matter  we would proceed on the basis that the 1961 act is a special statute. vis a vis the 1973 act and the rules framed thereunder. but in absence of any conflict in the provisions of the said act  the conditions of service including those relating to recruitment as provided for in the 1973 act and the 1987 rules would apply. if by reason of the latter  the appointment is invalid  the same cannot be validated by taking recourse to regularization. for the purpose of regularization which would confer on the concerned employee a permanent status  there must exist a post. however  we may hasten to add that regularization itself does not imply permanency. we have used the term keeping in view the provisions of 1963 rules. we have noticed the provisions of the act and the rules. no case was made out by the appellants herein in their statements of claim that they became permanent employees in terms thereof. there is also nothing on records to show that such a claim was put forward even in the demand raising the industrial dispute. presumably  the appellants were aware of the statutory limitations in this behalf. furthermore  the labour court having derived its jurisdiction from the reference made by the state government  it was bound to act within the four corners thereof. it could not enlarge the scope of the reference nor could deviate therefrom. a demand which was not raised at the time of raising the dispute could not have been gone into by the labour court being not the subject matter thereof. the questions which have been raised before us by dr  dhawan had not been raised before the labour court. the labour court in absence of any pleadings or any proof as regard application of the 1961 act and the 1963 rules had proceeded on the basis that they would become permanent employees in terms of order 2 ii  and 2 vi  of the annexure appended thereto. the appellants did not adduce any evidence as regard nature of their employment or the classification under which they were appointed. they have also not been able to show that they had been issued any permanent ticket. dr  dhawan is not correct in his submission that a separate ticket need not be issued and what was necessary was merely to show that the appellants had been recognized by the state as its employees having been provided with employment code. we have seen that their names had been appearing in the muster rolls maintained by the respondent. the scheme of the employees provident fund or the leave rules would not alter the nature and character of their appointments. the nature of their employment continues save and except a case where a statute interdicts which in turn would be subject to the constitutional limitations. for the purpose of obtaining a permanent status  constitutional and statutory conditions precedent therefor must be fulfilled. project work. this case involves 31 employees. a distinction is sought to be made by dr  dhawan that out of them 27 had been appointed to a project and not in a project. the distinction although appears to be attractive at the first blush but does not stand a moment s scrutiny. as noticed hereinbefore  the high court s observation remained unchallenged  that the project was to be financed by oda. the project was indisputably to be executed by the indore development authority  and for the implementation thereof  the appointments had to be made by it. if the appellants were appointed for the purpose of the project  they would be deemed to have been appointed therefor and only because such appointments had been made by the respondent would by itself not entitle them to claim permanency. the life of the project came to an end on 30 6 1997. the maintenance job upon completion thereof had been taken over by indore municipal corporation. the appellants were aware of the said fact and  thus  raised an alternative plea in their statements of claims. the labour court could not have granted any relief to them as prayed for  as indore municipal corporation is a separate juristic person having been created under a statute. such a relief would have been beyond the scope and purport of the reference made to the labour court by the state government. furthermore  the indore municipal corporation was not a party and  thus  no employee could be thrust upon it without its consent. it is furthermore evident that the persons appointed as daily wagers held no posts. the appointments  thus  had been made for the purpose of the project which  as indicated hereinbefore  came to an end. the plea of dr  dhawan to the effect that the appellants in civil appeal. no  337 of 2002 were asked to perform other duties also may not be of much significance having regard to our foregoing findings. however  it has been seen that even services of one of them had been requisitioned only for the project work. the high court  in our opinion  was right in arriving at the conclusion that the appellants were not entitled to be regularized in service. adverse inference. some documents were said to have been called for from the respondents which are said to have been not produced. one of such documents was offers of appointment. the witness examined on behalf of the respondents  although at one stage stated that the appointment letters had been issued to them  upon going through the records brought with him  however  asserted that no such appointment letter was issued. had the letters of appointment been issued  the appellants themselves could have produced the same. they did not do so. it is accepted at the bar  when the endorsement on the application filed by om prakash mondloi was shown that the appointment letters were not issued. we do not know the relevance of other documents called for for determining the issue. if a document was called for in absence of any pleadings  the same was not relevant. in absence of any pleadings  the appellants could not have called for any document to show that the provisions of the 1961 act and 1963 rules would apply. before the high court as also before us  the appellants have produced a large number of documents which were not filed before the labour court. such additional documents had been kept out of consideration by the high court as also by us. we have referred to the said fact only for the purpose of showing that it would not be correct to contend that the appellants had no access to the said documents. an adverse inference need not necessarily be drawn only because it would be lawful to do so. the labour court did not draw any adverse inference. such a plea was not even raised before the high court. in any event  in this case  we have proceeded on the basis that the assertions of the appellants as regard nature of their employment  their continuance in the job for a long time are correct and as such the question as to whether any adverse inference should be drawn for alleged production of documents called for would take a back seat. equal pay for equal work. the appellants having been employed on daily wages did not hold any post. no post was sanctioned by the state government. they were not appointed in terms of the provisions of the statute. they were not  therefore  entitled to take the recourse of the doctrine of  equal pay for equal work  as adumbrated in arts. 14 and 39 d  of the constitution of india. the burden was on the appellants to establish that they had a right to invoke the said doctrine in terms of art. 14 of the constitution of india. for the purpose of invoking the said doctrine  the nature of the work and responsibility attached to the post are some of the factors which were bound to be taken into consideration. furthermore  when their services had not been regularized and they had continued on a consolidated pay on ad hoc basis having not undergone the process of regular appointments  no direction to give regular pay scale could have been issued by the labour court. see orissa university of agriculture   technology and another vs  manoj k  mohanty  2003  5 scc 188 2003 indlaw sc 348. the said decision has been noticed in a  umarani 2004 indlaw sc 606  supra.

[Facts] ujjagar singh  the appellant herein  a resident of village bangawali  tehsil malerkotla  was tried and convicted by the additional sessions judge  sangrur for the murder of his niece mukhtiar kaur and was awarded the death penalty. in addition  he was convicted for an offence punishable u s. 376 of the ipc and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and to a fine of rs 5  000   and in default of payment to undergo further r i  for one year and u s. 309 of the ipc to a sentence of simple imprisonment for one year. the aforesaid convictions and sentences have been maintained by the high court and the matter is before us in these proceedings by way of special leave. the facts of the case are as under. at about 2 00 p m  on 10th november 2002 a boy whose identity is not forthcoming  informed satnam singh pw2 that an incident of firing had taken place in the house of ujjagar singh situated in the fields on the outskirts of the village. satnam singh conveyed this information to sarpanch jora singh pw1 who was attending a marriage at that time. jora singh accompanied by gurdeep singh pw3 thereupon rushed to ujjagar singh s house and found mukhtiar kaur lying dead with a gun shot injury and the appellant also with a gun shot injury lying unconscious on the ground in the adjoining room. jora singh and gurdeep singh immediately removed ujjagar singh to the civil hospital  dhuri in the jeep belonging to kulwant singh pw4. jora singh also met inspector harjinder pal singh pw14 at 4 40 p m  near the hospital  who recorded his statement at that place and with his endorsement ex. p a  sent it to police station  dhuri where the formal fir was registered at about 4 45 p m  with the special report being delivered to the illaka magistrate at dhuri itself at 6 20 p m  the same evening. the facts as narrated were that arjan singh of village bangawali had three sons puran singh  ujjagar singh  appellant  and ajmer singh. puran singh had died about 20 years earlier leaving behind his wife  two sons and a daughter mukhtiar kaur. the two sons and the wife also died long before the incident and mukhtiar kaur the sole surviving member of this branch of the family had been married to balwinder singh pw9 about 9 or 10 years earlier. puran singh had however transferred 30 or 35 bighas of agricultural land falling to his share after the death of his father in the name of the appellant s sons by a collusive decree in the year 1994 and the suggestion was that this transaction had been objected to by mukhtiar kaur who was demanding that the land be returned to her. it appears that mukhtiar kaur s relations with her in laws had got strained and she had left her matrimonial home and come to live with ujjagar singh  her uncle  7 or 8 months earlier and the suggestion was that mukhtiar kaur had been killed by the appellant with his licensed gun and he had thereafter attempted to commit suicide. having recorded the aforesaid facts in the fir  pw14 inspector harjinder pal singh reached the place of incident and lifted one spent 12 bore cartridge case  shaktiman make  from near mukhtiar kaur s dead body and one dbbl gun from the place where ujjagar singh appeared to have been shot and another spent cartridge case was recovered from the right barrel of the gun. after completion of the investigation at the spot  mukhtiar kaur s dead body was sent for its post mortem examination. the post mortem examination was also conducted by pw5 dr  ishwar singh  medical officer  civil hospital along with dr  harwinder kaur pw17 and it was found that mukhtiar kaur had two gunshot injuries on her dead body  a wound of entry on the back of right side of chest 2 cm x 1 cm with margining  and blackening and a corresponding exit wound of 5 cm x 3 5 cm to the front of the right side of the chest. dr  harwinder kaur aforesaid also took swabs from the vagina of the deceased and as per the chemical examiner s report dated 2 1 2003 semen was found on the swab taken from the vagina and from the underwear that mukhtiar kaur had been wearing at the time of her death. the weapon and the recovered cartridge cases had also been sent to the forensic science laboratory which in its report dated 4 8 2004 opined that the crime cartridge case ci  could  have been fired by the right barrel of the weapon whereas the crime cartridge case c2  had been  fired from the right barrel. on the completion of the investigation  a charge sheet under sections 302  376 and 309 of the ipc was filed against the accused and as he pleaded not guilty he was brought to trial. during the trial jora singh pw1  satnam singh pw2  gurdeep singh pw3 and kulwant singh pw4 resiled from their statements given to the police and were declared hostile. balwinder singh pw9  however  supported the prosecution case deposing that the land had in fact been got transferred from gurmail kaur  mother of mukhtiar kaur to ujjagar singh by fraud and mukhtiar kaur was therefore entitled to its return. he also deposed that mukhtiar kaur had told him some time earlier that the accused had been beating her and had also committed sexual intercourse with her and that at about 11 p m  on 10 11 2002 karam singh pw10 had informed him as to what had transpired on which he along with his father hamir singh pw12 and several others had rushed to bangawali. pw10 karam singh aforesaid confirmed the story given by balwinder singh. the prosecution also relied on the statements of dr  vijay kumar pw6 of the civil hospial  dhuri who testified that the appellant had been brought to the hospital at about 2 45 p m  on 10 11 2002 with a serious gun shot injury  dr  ripan miglani pw15 of the dayanand medical college   hospital  ludhiana who deposed that he had been admitted to the department of neuro surgery with a serious gun shot injury and dr  sanjay uppal pw16  a plastic surgeon who disclosed that the appellant had been under his treatment for almost 5 weeks and the burnt area around the firearm injury had been removed by him. the prosecution also placed reliance on the statement of asi jasbir singh pw11 who had accompanied inspector harjinder pal singh pw14 to the place of incident and supported the recoveries made from the spot. the prosecution case was then put to the accused and his statement recorded u s. p c. in reply to question 33 he stated as under   i am innocent. i have been implicated falsely in this case. i was treating mukhtiar kaur as my daughter and loved her as my daughter. false allegations have been levelled against me. i never harassed mukhtiar kaur nor ever got her land mutated from her mother by fraud. i have not killed mukhtiar kaur. mother of mukhtiar kaur got the land mutated by her own free will and mukhtiar kaur had no dispute about it. balwinder singh her husband was addicted to vices and used to beat her due to which she used to remain under depression and sick generally  and used to come to me as my daughter. my house  kothi  is situated on the outer skirts of village bangawali and door  planks  had not been fixed so far to rooms. some body suddenly came and fired at me. i fell down on the ground and became unconscious. therefore  i could not see what had happened to mukhtiar kaur as she was in other room. later on i came to know that some body had fired at her and she died. i regained consciousness in hospital. the story of rape by me with her has been fabricated by her husband as he is inimical towards me. even i do not know who took me to hospital. i have been implicated in this case falsely.
[Ratio of the decision] 313 of the cr. we have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record. we first take up for consideration the question of the conviction u s. 376 of the ipc. we find from the medical evidence and from the chemical examiner s reports that the vaginal swab and clothes taken from the dead body did indicate the presence of semen. there is however absolutely no evidence to suggest  even assuming that the intercourse had been committed by the appellant  that he had done so without mukhtiar kaur s consent or against her will. some suspicions of rape could perhaps have been raised had some tell tale injuries been detected on mukhtiar kaur s person but we find that the two injuries other than the gun shot wounds i e  injury no 3 being on the left pinna and. no  4 an abrasion near the right eye do not indicate any attempt to rape or the commission of rape. it is also significant that the investigators had made no attempt whatsoever to have the appellant medically examined to ascertain his capacity to perform sexual intercourse. the learned state counsel relying on the statement of pw14 inspector harjinder pal singh has however submitted that the examination had not been possible as the appellant had received a very serious gun shot injury and was hanging between life and death. we agree with the submission of the learned counsel that an examination could not have been carried out immediately. but we see no justification in the omission of the prosecution to have him examined after he had recovered his health and been discharged from hospital. we are further of the opinion that even assuming for a moment that sexual intercourse between the two had indeed taken place it cannot be said from the evidence before us that it was without the consent or against the wishes of mukhtiar kaur. we  therefore  find that ujjagar singh s conviction u s. 376 of the ipc cannot be sustained. mr  goburdhan has also cited mahmood v  state of u p   1976  1 scc 542 1975 indlaw sc 643  shankarlal gyarasilal dixit v  state of maharashtra  1981  2 scc 35 1980 indlaw sc 47  sharad birdhichand sarda v  state of maharashtra  1984  4 scc 116 1984 indlaw sc 432  omwati  smt  and ors. v  mahendra singh. ors. 1998  9 scc 81 1997 indlaw sc 1403  sudama pandey   ors. v  state of bihar  2002  1 scc 679 2001 indlaw sc 21243  and r r khanna reddy   anr. v  state of a p   2006  10 scc 172 2006 indlaw sc 144 in support of his plea relating to the evaluation of circumstantial evidence. these judgments have broadly followed the principles laid down in the judgments referred to above and need not therefore be dealt with us in extenso. it must nonetheless be emphasized that whether a chain is complete or not would depend on the facts of each case emanating from the evidence and no universal yardstick should ever be attempted. it is in this background that we must examine the circumstances in the present case. a few facts stand out from the prosecution story. first  the place of incident being adjoining rooms in the residential house of the appellant and the fact that the alleged murder weapon is his licensed dbbl gun is proved on record. the evidence also reveals that the appellant was living in the premises along with his wife  mother and son  and two daughters  who were studying outside the village  were frequent visitors  but it is the admitted position that nobody but the appellant and the deceased were present at the time of incident. it is also clear from the evidence that the two spent cartridge cases recovered  one from near mukhtiar kaur s dead body  and the second from the right barrel of the gun lying near the appellant had been sent to the forensic science laboratory which opined that one of the cartridges had been fired from the gun and the other could have been fired therefrom. we are of the opinion  however  that no adverse inference can be drawn from either of these circumstances. the aforesaid articles had been carried to the laboratory by constable gopal singh who in his affidavit dated 17th march 2003 deposed that he had first taken the articles to the laboratory on 9th december 2002 but they had been returned by the director on the ground that the seals affixed thereon were not of the requisite number and that after removing the objections raised by the director  the articles aforesaid had been returned to the laboratory on 18th december 2002. gopal singh was cross examined by the prosecution. and but for some inconsequential questions put to him with regard to the seals  not even a suggestion was made that the aforesaid articles had in any way been tampered with. it is true  as contended  that in column 22 of the inquest report which refers to the articles found near the dead body  there is no reference to the spent cartridges or the murder weapon but we find from a perusal of the site plan exh. pjj prepared by the investigating officer inspector harjinder pal singh pw14 on 10th november 2002 that the weapon is shown lying close to the place where the appellant had been found unconscious and a spent cartridge recovered from near the dead body of mukhtiar kaur. it has also been submitted by mr  goburdhan that there appeared to be no motive for the incident as the story about mukhtiar kaur s unhappiness about the transfer of land to the sons of ujjagar singh sought to be proved by pw9 balwinder singh and pw10 karam singh had been disbelieved by the high court with the observation that the statements of these two witnesses could not be relied upon. it is true that in a case relating to circumstantial evidence motive does assume great importance but to say that the absence of motive would dislodge the entire prosecution story is perhaps giving this one factor an importance which is not due and  to use the clichi. the motive is in the mind of the accused and can seldom be fathomed with any degree of accuracy. there is however a hint in the testimony of pw14 inspector harjinder pal singh that his enquiries had revealed that the accused was having illicit relations with mukhtiar kaur and we can assume that some thing untoward had happened which could have triggered the volatile and hostile incident. there could perhaps be some truth in this suggestion  as it is significant that though the appellant had an extended family living with him i e  mother  wife  son living  in the village  and two young daughters who were studying outside and residing in a hostel  but were frequent visitors home  yet none of them has come forth to depose in his favour. to our mind  therefore  this is yet another circumstance inculpating the accused. we are therefore of the opinion that this statement falsifies mr  goburdhan s argument on this aspect. it is also significant that the shot had apparently travelled upwards skirting the mandible  through the flesh of the cheek in an upward direction with minimal damage to the bone structure and it is indeed providential that the appellant got away with only an injury  albeit a very serious one. the fact that the shot was fired from below going upwards is also supported by the site plan exh. pjj wherein marks of a shot hitting the roof were seen at point e whereas the appellant was found lying at point d in the same room. it is therefore apparent that the weapon had indeed been fired by the appellant from a close range and that the blackened portion around the wound had been removed by dr  sanjay uppal. we have considered the submission of the state counsel very carefully. it is true that it is generally for the prosecution to prove its case beyond doubt but in circumstances such as the present one  some explanation is also due from an accused in order to absolve himself from suspicion of the crime. in his statement u s. p c  his positive stand was that he alone had been in the house with mukhtiar kaur when she had been killed and indeed as per exhibit p jj mukhtiar kaur s body had been found only one karam  5 feet  away from the place where the appellant lay injured. it must be emphasized that but for this self serving statement made by the appellant  there is nothing on record to support his positive stance. even otherwise  we are of the opinion that had the shot been fired by some intruder  the direction would have been more or less horizontal and parallel to the ground and not from down upwards with the pellets hitting the jaw  skirting the cheek and hitting the roof at point. e. in modi s medical jurisprudence and toxicology  23rd edition  at page 765 while dealing with identification of homicidal and suicidal injuries it has been observed that    a suicidal firearm wound is usually a contact wound situated on the side of the temple  depending on which hand was used to shoot himself  in the centre of the forehead  the roof of the mouth  in the chest or epigastrium in front or the left side and some times under the chin. the firearm is usually fired at close range. a small weapon like a revolver or a pistol is held in the hand  while a rifle or a shot gun is supported on the ground or against the wall. sometimes  the firing is done by pulling a string tied to the trigger by the big toe. the skin around the entry wound shows characteristic blackening  scorching and tattooing. in such cases the hand used to steady the weapon at the muzzle may be blackened and scorched and may also be stained with squirting of the blood from the injured arteries. in homicidal and accidental shooting  the wound may be on any part of the body and the path of the bullet may be in any direction. homicidal shooting by dacoits is not uncommon in india  and they are known to make their own firearms. immediate death following a firearm wound is uncommon and even when vital organs are injured  a person may be capable of doing extraordinary things. sometimes  firearm wounds may look like knife slashes or a bullet hole may resemble a penetrating stab wound  if the bullet strikes the head of shoulder at an angle or when an unstable bullet registers a broadside hit. a fateh describes a rare homicidal gun shot wound of the mouth  where the entry wound was in the tongue and the direction was horizontally backward  while in suicidal wounds the direction is upwards entrance would be in the palate or posterior pharynx. dr  b r sharma in his book  forensic science in criminal investigation and trials   fourth edition   at page 1160 too has delineated the circumstances that could indicate suicide and while referring to the site of the injury has observed   certain sites are predominantly used by suicides for self inflicted injuries. for example  with firearm  temple forehead mouth and chest are the favourite sites. with knife throat and wrist are the favourite sites. hesitation injuries are also observed in some suicide cases. it is  therefore  clear to us that the story of unknown assailants entering the house and causing mukhtiar kaur s murder etcetera has to be ruled out and that the prosecution story that it was the appellant who had first shot mukhtiar kaur and then attempted to commit suicide  stands proved. we also find that no part of the evidence of the hostile witnesses comes to the aid of the appellant. the question now arises as to the sentence that should be imposed on the appellant. it would be seen that both the sessions court and the high court were appalled by the allegations and findings of incestuous rape and murder. we are however of the opinion  as already noted above  that a case of rape has not been made out. in this background the death sentence is not called for.

[Facts] the appellants in this appeal claiming to be the tenants of agricultural land bearing survey no 125 1 measuring 3 acres 11 gunthas. hereinafter called as the  scheduled land   situated in lingabahalli village madhugiri taluk in the state of karnataka filed form no 7 before the land tribunal praying for a declaration that they had acquired occupancy rights in respect of the scheduled land. they alleged that they were cultivating the scheduled land from 1968 till the notified date under the act on wara basis giving 1 3rd of the share in the foodgrains to respondent no 4 accordingly the appellants prayed for an order of occupancy right in respect of the scheduled land alleging that they and their father were cultivating the scheduled land as occupancy. right holders relying inter alia on the entries under the rtc record. the case of the appellants as made out was disputed by the respondent no 4 the case of respondent no 4 was that the scheduled land was mortgaged to the 3rd respondent rajashankar in the year 1968 and after the expiry of the said mortgage the mortgagee was liable to deliver possession of the same. the case of tenancy as made out by the appellants or their father was denied. it was alleged by the respondent no 4 that since the respondent no 3 was a film actor and had settled in madras  now chennai  with the consent of the respondent no 3 the scheduled land was given to the father of the appellants and the father of the appellants was cultivating the same from the year 1968 but not as a tenant. accordingly they prayed for rejection of the application filed by the father of the appellants claiming occupancy rights under the act. initially the land tribunal allowed the application of the father of the appellants and feeling aggrieved  a writ petition was filed against the said order. the high court had set aside the order of the land tribunal and remanded the case back to the tribunal for a fresh decision. the land tribunal after remand relying on the entries in the rtc record and some other materials on record granted occupancy rights in favour of the appellants. feeling aggrieved the respondent no 4 filed an appeal before the appellate authority which was also dismissed. a revision petition thereafter was moved before the high court and the high court by the impugned judgment had set aside the concurrent findings of fact and rejected the application filed by the father since deceased of the appellants holding inter alia that the appellants or their father had failed to prove the tenancy in respect of the scheduled land. a special leave petition was filed against the judgment of the high court setting aside the concurrent orders allowing the application in respect of which leave has already been granted. while setting aside the findings of the tribunal the high court at paragraph 7 of the impugned judgment made the following findings   it is an undisputed fact that the revision petitioner has mortgaged the land in dispute in favour of the 5th respondent rajashankar in the year 1968 and after the expiry of the mortgage period since the 5th respondent failed to deliver back the possession of the land in dispute to him he filed the suit for redemption and obtained a decree for redemption. when the matter stood thus the father of the respondent nos 3 and 4 gondappa who is the uncle of the 5th respondent rajashankar filed form no 7 before the land tribunal claiming occupancy rights in respect of the land in dispute contending that he is the tenant of the said land under the 5th respondent from the year 1968 i e subsequent to the date of mortgage. to prove this fact he relied upon the entries in the r t c extract for the years 1968 to 1974 wherein his name is shown as the person in cultivation of the land in dispute. but it is significant to note that the nature of cultivation of the land is not shown as that of a tenant in the said r t c extracts. in one year the nature of cultivation is described as  swantha and in the years the column is left blank. thus the r t c extracts produced by him do not support his contention that he was cultivating the land in dispute as a tenant. he has not produced any geni receipts or any lease agreement to show that the 5th respondent has leased out the land in dispute in his favour on crop share basis and that he paid the geni to the 5th respondent. thus he has no documentary evidence in respect of his claim that he came in possession of the land in dispute as a tenant under the 5th respondent and that he was cultivating the land in dispute as a tenant. it is further significant to note that in the evidence given by the respondent no 3 before the land tribunal he claimed that his father has taken the land in dispute on lease in the year 1962 from the father of the petitioners gundu rao. even in respect of the said claim he failed to produce any documentary evidence evidencing the said lease of land in dispute from gundu rao. on the other hand in form no 7 filed by gondappa the father of the respondents 3 and 4 he alleged that he was the tenant under the 5th respondent in respect of the land in dispute from the year 1968. thus there is no consistent stand regarding the year of commencement of tenancy or under whom gondappa the father of the respondents 3 and 4 became the tenant. so the only question which arises for consideration is whether the said cultivation of the land in dispute by the father of the respondents 3 and 4 during the years 1968 to 1974 can be presumed to be that of a tenant under the provisions of s 4 of the karnataka land reforms act. s 4 of the act makes it clear that a member of the owner s family cannot be considered as a deemed tenant even if he is lawfully cultivating the land belonging to owner. in the present case since the father of the respondents 3 and 4 is the uncle of the respondent no 5 it cannot be said that he is not a member of the family of the respondent no 5. though there is no evidence on record to show that there are any joint family properties belonging to the joint family of respondent no 5 and his uncle there is nothing on record to show that they are not living as members of the joint family. so it is not possible to presume that the father of the respondent nos 3 and 4 gondappa who is the uncle of respondent no 5 was not the member of the family of the mortgagee respondent no 5. again the high court while setting aside the findings of fact also made the following findings   but in the instant case since the respondents 3 and 4 failed to produce any evidence to show that their father was cultivating the land in dispute as a tenant under the 5th respondent mortgagee and even when the entries in the r t c extract produced do not support the claim of tenancy set up by the father of the respondents 3 and 4 the question of drawing presumption of deemed tenancy in his favour under s 4 of the act does not arise. the father of the respondents 3 and 4 being the uncle of respondent no 5 mortgagee it is also quite possible that he might have been allowed to cultivate the land in dispute under the personal supervision of respondent no 5 by assisting him in cultivation of the said land. in the present case also the respondents 3 and 4 failed to prove that their father was cultivating the land in dispute from the year 1968 as a tenant under the respondent no 5 and that after the death of their father they continued as tenants in respect of the land in dispute. it is also significant to note that the respondent no 5 who was alive when the enquiry was pending before the land tribunal has not given evidence in favour of the respondents 3 and 4 stating that he has leased out the land in dispute in favour of the respondents 3 and 4 except the interested testimony of respondents 3 and 4 there is nothing else on record to show that their father was inducted as a tenant to cultivate the land in dispute by the 5th respondent after the land is dispute was taken on mortgage by him. so it is not possible to presume that the father of the respondents 3 and 4 was inducted as a tenant by the mortgagee the 5th respondent in respect of the land in dispute. since the respondents 3 and 4 failed to produce any documentary evidence to show that their father was put in possession of the land in dispute by the 5th respondent mortgagee as a  tenant  and that they are continuing as tenants in respect of the said land after the death of their father i find that they are not entitled to grant of occupational rights. the earlier decision of this court reported in ilr 1996 kar page 2340 that when a person fails to prove that he is cultivating the land as tenant he cannot be granted occupational right notwithstanding the fact that he might be in possession of the land and cultivating the same is applicable to the facts of the present case on all fours.
[Ratio of the decision] in our view although the high court had set aside the concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the tribunals below under the karnataka land reforms. act 1974  in short the act   in the exercise of its revisional jurisdiction under section 121a of the act even then this is not a fit case where this court in the exercise of its power u art 136 of the constitution would interfere with such an order of the high court. we have heard mr. raju learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants and mr. s n bhat learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents. we have examined the impugned judgment of the high court as well as the orders of the tribunals below. it is true that the high court while exercising its revisional power under section 121a of the act had set aside the concurrent findings of fact of the land tribunal as well as of the appellate authority even then examining the findings of the high court and considering the power conferred on it in the revisional jurisdiction under section 121a of the act we do not find any reason to interfere with the impugned order of the high court in the exercise of our power u art 136 of the constitution. from a careful examination of the findings given by the high court as quoted hereinabove in upsetting the concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the tribunals below we are not in a position to hold that the high court was not justified in setting aside the concurrent orders of the tribunals below in the exercise of its revisional power under section 121a of the act. from a plain reading of section 121a of the act under which revisional jurisdiction can be exercised it would be clear that the high court while exercising such power is entitled to re appreciate the evidence when it finds that the conclusion arrived at by the appellate authority runs contrary to the materials on record and when it finds that there is no evidence to support the conclusion of the appellate authority or when it finds that the reasons given by the appellate authority are absolutely perverse and cannot be supported by the evidence on record. it would also be clear from a plain reading of section 121a of the act that the high court is also entitled to interfere with the orders of the tribunals below when the material evidence on record was ignored or a finding was such that no court would come to such conclusion or that the decision of the tribunals below was manifestly unjust. we have carefully examined the provisions under section 121a of the act which is the revisional power under the act and also the provisions u s 115 of the code of civil procedure  for short  the code   so far as s 115 of the code is concerned it has been made clear that it is only in case of a jurisdictional error or when the courts below had acted with material irregularity in the exercise of their jurisdiction that the question of interfering with such an order can arise otherwise the high court is not entitled to interfere with any other order which does not satisfy the conditions laid down for interference u s 115 of the code. on the other hand in our view under section 121a of the act it would be open to the high court to interfere with the orders of the tribunals below as the high court is empowered to look into the legality of the order or regularity of the proceedings although in the exercise of revisional jurisdiction u s 115 of the code the high court is not entitled to look into the legality of the order or the regularity of the proceedings but only entitled to interfere with the orders of the tribunals or the courts below when it finds that they have a  exercised a jurisdiction not vested in them by law or b  failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested or c  acted in the exercise of their jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity. reading the aforesaid provisions viz  section 121a of the act and s 115 of the code we have no hesitation in our mind to hold that the revisional power exercised by the high court under section 121a of the act is wider than the one exercised by the high court in its revisional jurisdiction u s 115 of the code. as noted herein earlier since section 121a of the act clearly empowers the high court to look into the legality of the orders impugned therefore it would be open to the high court to consider the material evidence on record when it finds that such evidence was not at all considered by the tribunals below or when the conclusion arrived at by the tribunals below run contrary to the materials on record or when it finds that there is no evidence to support the conclusion of the tribunals below or that the reasons given by the tribunals below are absolutely perverse or a finding was such that no court would come to such a conclusion or that the decisions of the tribunals below were manifestly unjust. therefore under section 121a of the act in the presence of any of the abovementioned circumstances the high court is empowered to look into the legality of the orders impugned in deciding the question whether the appellants could be held to be the tenants under the respondent nos 3 or 4. keeping the aforesaid principles in mind as to when the high court would be justified in the exercise of its power under section 121a of the act to examine the legality of the orders of the tribunals below in an appropriate case let us now examine the findings of the high court while setting aside the concurrent findings of fact of the tribunals below. in our view on a careful examination of the findings of the high court which were based on consideration of the material evidence on record it is difficult for us to hold that the high court was not justified in setting aside the concurrent findings of fact of the tribunals below in the exercise of its jurisdiction under section 121a of the act. we have already noted the findings made by the high court in the impugned judgment on the question whether the appellants could be held to be the tenants on the evidence and materials on record. while doing so in our view the high court was justified in coming to the conclusion that the evidence and material on record would clearly establish that the appellants were not able to prove that they were the tenants in respect of the scheduled land under the respondents. one of the main criteria for deciding whether a particular person is a tenant or not is to see whether there was payment of rent either in cash or in kind. in this case while rejecting the claim of the appellants the high court had considered that the appellants had failed to satisfy the court that any payment of rent was made either by the father of the appellants or by the appellants themselves. the tribunals below while accepting the case of the appellants had relied on the entries made in the rtc record in respect of certain period. while considering such entries the high court had rightly held that from the entries in the rtc record for the years 1968 to 1974 the name of the appellants was not shown as the person in cultivation of the land in dispute and also the nature of cultivation of the scheduled land was not shown as that of the tenants in the said rtc record. that being the position the high court had come to a proper conclusion that the entries in the rtc extracts produced by the appellants could not support the contention that they were cultivating the land in dispute as the tenants. in our view also the high court was fully justified in drawing an adverse inference against the appellants for not producing any geni receipts or any lease agreement to show that the 5th respondent before the high court  respondent no 3 herein  had in fact leased out the scheduled land in favour of the appellants or their father since deceased on crop share basis and that the appellants had paid the geni to the 5th respondent. such being the findings arrived at by the high court with which we are in concurrence it is difficult to hold that the tenancy claimed by the appellants in respect of the scheduled land could be established. considering the above aspect of the matter and after considering the scope of section 121a of the act we are therefore unable to agree with the learned counsel for the appellants that in the exercise of revisional jurisdiction under section 121a of the act the high court was not entitled to set aside the concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the appellate authority and the land tribunal. such being the position we do not find any reason to interfere with the judgment of the high court although the high court in the exercise of its power under section 121a of the act had set aside the concurrent orders of the appellate authority as well as the land tribunal. in that case the findings recorded by the appellate authority as affirmed by the high court by placing reliance on the entries made in the record of rights to the effect that the appellants were not in possession of the land on the relevant date nor were they cultivating the same were not accepted by this court. in any view of the matter in that decision relying on the aforesaid findings this court also had set aside the order made by the appellate authority as affirmed by the high court in revision and restored the order made by the land tribunal. if that case is of any help to the facts of the present case it would be in favour of the respondents. so far as krishtappa yellapa pujar   ors vs. ram samsthan beladhadi   1999  1 scc 74  is concerned we again fail to understand that how this could be of any help to the appellants. in that decision it has been made clear that the high court was entitled to interfere with the orders of the appellate authority only on question of law or irregularity in procedure and on no other aspect. in our view we have already held that the high court was entitled to interfere with the concurrent orders of the tribunals below as material evidence on record was not considered at all and non consideration of the material evidence on record is a question of law and therefore the high court was entitled to interfere. accordingly this decision is of no help to the appellants. lastly in our view in view of the discussion made herein above the decision relied on by the learned counsel for the appellant in the case of dahya lal   ors vs. rasul mohammed abdul rahim  1963  3  scr 1 1962 indlaw sc 366  need not be discussed. there is another aspect of this matter. even assuming that the high court was not justified in setting aside the concurrent findings of fact in the exercise of its revisional jurisdiction under section 121a of the act then also we are of the view that it is not a fit case where this court should interfere with the impugned judgment of the high court in the exercise of our power u art 136 of the constitution. considering the concurrent orders of the appellate authority and the land tribunal and the impugned order of the high court we are in agreement with the high court because the view taken by it was plausible and therefore the question of interference by us u art 136 of the constitution is not warranted.

[Facts] plot nos 17 7 and 17 8 were owned by respondent no 4 herein. appellant was a tenant under the said respondent in respect of plot no 17 8 admeasuring 1067 sq m. he used to run a business of marble and stone therein. a road widening project was proposed in terms of the said scheme. notices therefor were issued both to the appellant as also the respondent no. appellant objected thereto. he however did not pursue his case in regard to the proposal for widening of the road. for the said public purpose viz  widening of the road 867 sq m of land was taken over leaving only 200 sq m of land. with a view to give effect to the provisions of the act and the rules framed thereunder proceedings were initiated for allotment of the said land in terms of the act 20  of the land was taken over without payment of any compensation. in respect of the proceedings initiated for the purpose of re allotment of the land despite a public notice the appellant did not file any objection. he did not take any part in the proceedings therefor. respondent no 4 was allotted a final plot bearing no 157 and the said 200 sq m of land of plot no 17 8 has merged in final plot no 165 owned by the respondent no 3. the scheme was notified in the year 1999 respondent no 1 herein which is the statutory agency in terms of the act for the purpose of implementation of the scheme issued a notice u s 67 of the act upon the respondent no 4 on or about 15 01 2000 as he did not respond thereto a notice u s 68 of the act was served on him on 31 03 2000 stating   as per the said approved preliminary scheme the plot no 157 is allotted to you. and its pole demarcations were done by the town planning officer at site. the said final plot  original plot is allotted in lieu of your no 17 7 17 8 paiki land. and the said land is now vested in the municipal corporation from 1 7 1999 and is of the ownership of the municipal corporation. thereafter the notice below s 67 for the change in occupation was issued on 15 1 2000 to you. in spite of this you have not handed over the possession. therefore as per the gujarat town planning and urban development rules 1979 rule 33 the undersigned in exercise of powers conferred below s 68 1  and 8 2  of the bombay provincial municipalities act and below the s 68 notice under the gujarat town planning and urban development act this is to inform you that as shown in the sketch on the reverse the premises marked should be vacated within 7 days from receipt of the notice and had over the possession to the surat municipal corporation. if you fail to do so then on completion of the stipulated time limit as per the rule 33 of the gujarat town planning and urban development rules 1979 the said land and the occupation on the same will be summarily evicted and your occupation will be removed and if you obstruct  interfere on it after taking away the possession you trespass then as provided under rule 33 of the gujarat town planning and urban development rules 1979. the action as per the s 188 of the indian penal code will be initiated against you before the criminal court pleased take note of the same. the validity and  or legality of the said notice was questioned by the appellant by filing a writ petition in the high court of gujarat inter alia contending that the purported final allotment of plot no 165 in favour of the respondent no 3 and allotment of final plot no 157 in favour of the respondent no 4 were made without issuing any notice as envisaged u ss 52 and 53 of the act. in the said writ petition it was prayed    on the facts and circumstances mentioned herein above the petitioner prays to your lordships that   a  be pleased to issue writ of mandamus or writ in the nature of mandamus or appropriate writ order or direction quashing and setting aside the impugned action of acquiring and demolishing the structures available on the land in question i e  original plot no 17 a  r s no 17 p situated at umra surat. a division bench of the high court dismissed an intra court appeal preferred thereagainst. appellant was a tenant in respect of plot no 17 8 plot no 17 7 was not a plot contiguous thereto. they were separated not only by a road but also by various other plots.
[Ratio of the decision] interpretation and  or application of the provisions of the gujarat town planning and urban development act 1976  for short  the act   and the rules framed thereunder known as the gujarat town planning and urban development rules 1979. for short  the rules   is in question in this appeal which arises out of a judgment and order dated 27 12 2006 passed by a division bench of the high court of gujarat at ahmedabad in letters patent appeal no 1611 of 2006 arising out of a judgment and order dated 23 11 2006 passed by a learned single judge of the said court in sca no 7092 of 2001. before embarking upon the issue involved in this appeal we may notice the admitted fact of the matter. the government of gujarat in exercise of its power conferred upon it u s 65 of the act made a scheme in respect of the town of umra surat on 1 06 1999. mr. the act was enacted to consolidate and amend the law relating to the making and execution of development plans and town planning schemes in the state of gujarat. it is not necessary for us to delve deep into the statutory scheme. suffice it to say that chapter iv of the act deals with control of development and use of land included in the development plans. chapter v of the act provides for town planning schemes. s 40 of the act empowers the appropriate authority to make one or more schemes. a declaration of intention to make a scheme is to be notified whereafter a draft scheme may be published. s 45 provides for reconstitution of the plots sub s  2. whereof inter alia enables allotment of a final plot from an original plot by transfer of any adjoining lands. s 52 contemplates issuance of a notice in a prescribed manner and in the prescribed form. before embarking upon the rival contentions we may also notice that the provisions of the bombay town planning rules 1955. for short  the bombay rules   are in pari materia with  the rules. a town planning scheme therefore envisages calling for objection from the persons concerned for three purposes    i  in regard to draft scheme   ii  lodging of any claim for payment of compensation   iii  participation in the matter of allotment of final plots. we may however notice that rule 21 of the bombay rules provides for notice under sub rule  3  thereof and a reasonable opportunity of hearing under sub rule  5  thereof. sub rule  3  of rule 21 of the bombay rules provides for issuance of a special notice upon the person interested in any plot or in any particular plot comprised in the scheme. we may also take notice of the decision of this court in mansukhlal jadavji. darji1991 indlaw sc 975  supra  wherein this court opined that sub rule  3  of rule 21 of the bombay rules was mandatory in nature subject of course to the condition that on the crucial date viz  when the town planning scheme is notified in the official gazette he whether an owner or tenant or sub tenant must be in possession of the property. it is also not in dispute that the appellant filed an objection in regard to the draft scheme but did not eventually pursue the same. the draft scheme was approved 867 sq m of land had been acquired for public purpose out of the said plot no 17 8 while the proceedings relating to allotment of final plot were in progress he even did not file any objection thereto. if he intended to claim any interest in a portion of plot no 17 8 either for the purpose of obtaining compensation for acquisition of a part of the land or to continue to have possession over 200 sq m of land in plot no 17 8 it was obligatory on his part to take part in the proceedings. whether irrespective of rule 26 of the rules which prescribes for issuance of a general public notice any special notice upon the appellant was required to be served by the state or by the authority in our opinion cannot be gone into by us in these proceedings for the first time. validity of rule 26 of the rules had never been questioned. it had also not been contended that the said rule is ultra vires s 52 of the act. a person interested in continuing to keep possession over a property and  or a part of the amount of compensation must lay his claim before the appropriate authority at the appropriate stage. if in absence of any such claim filed by the appellant the authorities have proceeded to finalise allotment of final plot in favour of the respondent nos 3 and 4 herein it is too late in the day to contend that the entire scheme should be re opened. we would consider the effect of sub s  3  of s 65 of the act a little later but we may at this juncture notice that the respondent no 3 in whose favour plot no 165 has been allotted which includes 200 sq m of land purported to be in possession of the appellant had nothing to do with the dispute between the appellant and his landlord the respondent no 4 respondent no 4 was in possession of a contiguous plot. respondent no 4 was owner of both plot. nos 17 7 and 17 8 he was therefore in his own right entitled to final allotment of some plot. we would however assume that it was obligatory on the part of the state to serve a special notice upon the appellant. the question however would be   what would be the consequence of non compliance thereof vis   vis the conduct of the appellant himself. a person may waive a right either expressly or by necessary implication. he may in a given case disentitle himself from obtaining an equitable relief particularly when he allows a thing to come to an irreversible situation. different statutes provide for different manner of service of notice. the bangalore development authority act 1976 provides that every person whose name appears in the assessment list or land revenue records shall be served with notice  see sureshchandra c mehta v. state of karnataka and others 1994 supp  2  scc 511 1993 indlaw sc 538. in west bengal housing board etc v. brijendra prasad gupta and others etc  air 1997 sc 2745  it was opined that the authority is not required to make a roaming enquiry as to who is the person entitled to notice. we have referred to the said decisions only to show that the requirements in regard to the manner of service of notice varies from statute to statute and there exists a difference between the bombay rules and the rules. we are however not unmindful of the fact that a statute of town planning ex facie is not a statute for acquisition of a property. an owner of a plot is asked to part therewith only for providing for better facilities of which he would also be a beneficiary. every step taken by the state does not involve application of the doctrine of eminent domain. in this case the appellant did not oppose the draft scheme. it accepted that the state had a right to do so. existence of a public purpose and increase in the valuation of the property was admitted. there exists a distinction in the action of the planning authority as regards vesting of a property in it and one so as to enable it to create a third party interest vis   vis for the purpose of re allotment thereof. in the former case the vesting of the land may be held to be an act of acquisition whereas in the latter it would be distribution of certain benefits having regard to the purpose sought to be achieved by a statute involving town planning. it was on that legal principle this court in state of gujarat v. shantilal mangaldas   ors  1969  3  scr 341 1969 indlaw sc. 254  opined that when a development is made the owner of the property gets much more than what would have he got if the same remained undeveloped in the process as by reason thereof he gets the benefit of living in a developed town having good town planning. when a statute makes an elaborate provision as regards the formalities required to be undergone at every stage by the local authority the state government and other authorities concerned in preparing and making the final town planning scheme the same should be considered to be exhaustively  maneklal chhotalal. ors v. m g makwana   ors   1967  3 scr 65 1967 indlaw sc 138. we are however not oblivious that in a given situation a question may also arise as to whether the restrictions imposed by a statute are reasonable or not. it is not a case where the state by its acts of omissions and commissions was unjustly enriching itself. it was a dispute between two private parties as regards the right to obtain final allotment  the principles underlying the same are not in dispute. what is in dispute is the distribution of quantum thereof between two competing claimants viz  landlord and tenant. we do not mean to say that under no circumstances the appellant was entitled to allotment of a portion of the property or mandatory compensation in lieu thereof from the landlord. but we intend to emphasise that he has lost his right to enforce the same in a public law forum. he has no enforceable claim against the state at this juncture. he may pursue his claim only against the respondent no 4 in an appropriate proceedings wherein for certain purposes the state or the authorities may also be impleaded as a party. even if he had a claim he would be deemed to have waived the same for the reasons stated hereinafter. it is not in dispute that    a  appellant although filed an objection with regard to the draft scheme did not choose to pursue it. b. he did not file objections for re allotment and did not participate in the proceedings following acquisition instituted by the authorities under the act. in view of the above the issue is whether it was open to him to assert his purported right to special notice in respect of the final allotment in the instant case given the fact that he did not pursue his objections to the draft scheme and subsequently did not object participate during the proceedings for re allotment. it has been noticed by us hereinbefore that under rule 26 of the rules applicable in the instant case as distinguished from the bombay rules  wherein special notice is required  no special notice is mandatorily required to be served. assuming however that it was obligatory for the state to issue notice to the appellant the question is whether the principle of waiver precludes him from claiming equitable relief in this case due to his earlier conduct which allowed the entire process of acquisition and allotment to become final. we are of the opinion that even if he had any such right he waived the same. in halsbury s laws of england volume 16 2  4th edition para 907 it is stated   the expression  waiver  may in law bear different meanings. the primary meaning has been said to be the abandonment of a right in such a way that the other party is entitled to plead the abandonment by way of confession and avoidance if the right is thereafter asserted and is either express or implied from conduct. it may arise from a party making an election for example whether or not to exercise a contractual right. waiver may also be by virtue of equitable or promissory estoppel  unlike waiver arising from an election no question arises of any particular knowledge on the part of the person making the representation and the estoppel may be suspensory only. where the waiver is not express it may be implied from conduct which is inconsistent with the continuance of the right without the need for writing or for consideration moving from or detriment to the party who benefits by the waiver but mere acts of indulgence will not amount to waiver  nor may a party benefit from the waiver unless he has altered his position in reliance on it. the legal principle emerging from these decisions is also stated in craies on statute law  6th edn   at page 369 as follows   as a general rule the conditions imposed by statutes which authorise legal proceedings are treated as being indispensable to giving the court jurisdiction. but if it appears that the statutory conditions were inserted by the legislature simply for the security or benefit of the parties to the action themselves and that no public interests are involved such conditions will not be considered as indispensable and either party may waive them without affecting the jurisdiction of the court. emphasis supplied. applying the above principles to the present case it must be held that the benefit of notice provided under the act and rules being for the benefit of the appellant in which no public interests are involved he has waived the same. in this view of the matter it may safely be stated that the appellant through his conduct has waived his right to an equitable remedy in the instant case. such conduct precludes and operates as estoppel against him with respect to asserting a right over a portion of the acquired land in a situation where the scheme in question has attained finality following as a result of the appellant s inaction. lalit submits that his client is ready and willing to pay some reasonable amount to the respondent no 3 in whose favour plot no 165 has been finally allotted. issuance of any such direction in our opinion is legally impermissible.

[Facts] the facts giving rise to the said question are these   by hajur order no 116 dated october 27 1933 the respondent  maharaj shri amar singji himatsingji  was granted daljitgarh jagir comprising of 10 villages mentioned in the said order in jivarak  for maintenance  by the then ruler of idar  by another hajur order no 807 dated january 12 1934 the respondent was given a further grant in jivarak of 3 villages mentioned in that order with effect from october 1 1933  by yet another hajur order no 964 dated november 21 1947 14 villages  including kapoda and isarwada  were granted in jivarak to the respondent by the ruler of idar in substitution of the villages mentioned in the previous two orders. according to the respondent by these grants  parvanas  read together he was given full proprietary rights in the soil of the said villages that is to say it was a proprietary jagir that was granted to him by the then ruler. admittedly on the coming into force of the bombay merged territories and areas  jagirs abolition  act 1953  hereinafter referred to as  the act   i e with effect from respondent s daljitgarh jagir stood abolished and all his rights in the jagir villages save as expressly provided by or under the act were extinguished and the respondent became entitled to compensation under s 11 of the act. it appears that for the purpose of implementing the provisions of the act the competent authority  collector of district sabarkantha  held an inquiry into the question whether the respondent s jigir was proprietary  involving any right or interest in the soil  or non proprietary  involving mere assignment of land revenue or rent due to government  under s 2  4   i  of the act and having regard to the documentary and other evidence led before it the competent authority by its order dated september 8 1959 held that the daljitgarh jagir of the respondent was a proprietary jagir. it further appears that pursuant to an order dated november 24 1959 passed by the mamlatdar idar an entry was made on june 18 1963 in the relevant revenue records  village form no 6  of one of the villages kapoda comprised in the jagir to the effect that the respondent s right to take out gravel and stones was recognised but the right relating to excavation of mica had been reserved and retained by the government  this entry was only certified on march 30 1965 according to the respondent since the entries made in the revenue records in respect of his rights to mines and mineral products were not sufficient and proper and though the mamlatdar s order dated november 24 1959 was in respect of two villages namely kapoda and isarwada the relevant entry in respect of greval and stones had been made only in regard to village kapoda he by his application dated october 11 1968 requested the collector sabarkantha to issue necessary orders to the mamlatdar idar to make appropriate entries regarding his rights in the minerals in village isarwada. a similar application containing similar request was also made by the respondent to the mamlatdar taluka idar on october 4 1971 thereupon a notice under s 37 2  of the bombay land revenue code for the purpose of holding an inquiry into the rights of the respondent to mines and mineral products of the said villages claimed by the respondent wag served upon him but the respondent raised a preliminary objection that such inquiry wag misconceived and incompetent in view of the determination made under s 2  4   i  of the act and having regard to the provisions of s 10 of the act his rights to mines and mineral products were expressly saved  the collector of sabarkantha  appellant no 2  overruled the preliminary objection and by order dated february 23 1973 directed that the inquiry shall proceed and the respondent was directed to produce his evidence in support of his claim on a date that would be fixed and intimated to him. aggrieved by this order passed by the collector on february 23 1973 the respondent preferred a writ petition  special civil application no 1224 of 1973  under art 227 of the constitution to the gujarat high court and writ of certiorari quashing the order dated february 23 1973 and a direction restraining the collector from further proceeding with the inquiry under s 37 2  of the land revenue code were sought. these reliefs sought by the respondent were resisted by the state of gujarat and the collector  the appellants before us  principally on the ground that the inquiry under s 37 2  of the land revenue code into the rights to mines and mineral products in the said villages claimed by the respondent was necessary and proper and could not be said to be concluded by the determination made under s 2  4   1  of the act by the competent authority. the appellants seek to challenge the said judgment and order of the gujarat high court in this appeal. admittedly by his previous order dated november 24 1959 the mamlatdar of talukadar had declared that the respondent had been granted all the rights particularly the right to quarry and remove gravel and stones in isarwada and kapoda villages in the year 1947 by the idar stale and that thereafter in the years 1952 and 1953 the jagirdar had taken the produce of stone and that therefore the government could not stop him from  taking out gravel and stones  but that the rights to excavating mica had been retained by the state  further pursuant to this  order the appropriate entry had been made in the relevant village records  form no 6  of village kapoda on june 18 1963 recognising the respondents right to take out gravel and stones which entry was verified and confirmed on march 30 1965 it was in this situation that the respondent made the aforesaid two applications one to the collector sabarkantha and the other to the mamladar taluka idar whereby relying upon the previous order of the mamlatdar dated november 24 1959 he requested that appropriate entries pertaining to his right to gravel and stones should be similarly made in respect of village isarwada.
[Ratio of the decision] the main question raised in this appeal by special leave at the instance of state of gujarat and the collector of sabarkantha against the gujarat high court s judgment and order dated january 30 31 1975 allowing the writ petition of the respondent is whether once the competent authority under s 2 4   i  of the bombay merged territories and areas  jagirs abolition. act 1953  bombay act. no xxxix of 1954  declares that a particular jagir is a proprietary one a further inquiry under s 37  2  of the bombay land revenue code  bombay act. no. v of 1879  with a view to determining whether the jagirdar had any rights to mines or mineral products in his jagir granted or recognised under any contract grant or law for the time being in force or by custom or usage is competent. having regard to the rival contentions of the parties summarised above it will appear clear that really two questions one general and the other specific in the light of the facts obtaining in the instant case arise for our determination in this appeal. the general question is whether once the competent authority under s 2  4   i  of the act declares that the particular jagir is a proprietary one a further inquiry under s 37 2  of the land revenue code with a view to determining whether the jagirdar had rights to mines and mineral products in such jagir subsisting on the appointed date is competent. the other specific question is whether in the facts of the case and having regard to the nature of evidence considered and the specific finding made by the competent authority while determining the question under s 2 4. i  the further inquiry initiated by the collector under s 37 2  was misconceived and uncalled for. dealing with the first question which is of a general character it is clear that the answer thereto depends upon the true scope and ambit of the inquiry under s 2  4   i  of the act and to determine the same it will be necessary to consider the scheme and object of the act and in particular the purpose of the said inquiry. the enactment as its preamble will show has been put on the statute book with a view to abolishing jagirs of various kinds in the merged territories and merged areas in the state of bombay and to provide for matters consequential and incidental thereto. the aforesaid survey of the material provisions of the act will bring out two or three aspects very clearly. in the first place the preamble and s 3 of the act clearly show that the object of the enactment is to abolish jagirs of all kinds in the merged territories and merged areas in the state of bombay and to convert all jagir villages into unalienated villages liable to the payment of land revenue in accordance with the provisions of the bombay land revenue code. secondly compensation is made payable under s 11 of the act to jagirdars whose jagirs and other incidental rights have been extinguished but it will be pertinent to note that no provision has been made for payment of compensation in respect of rights to mines and mineral products in a jagir village obviously because if by the grant in question the jagirdar has not been given any rights to mines and mineral products no compensation would be payable and if there be a grant of mines and mineral products the same have been saved  to the jagirdar under s 10 of the act. thirdly the quantum of compensation payable for abolition of jagir and extinguishment of his other rights depends upon what kind of jagir has been abolished whether it is proprietary or non proprietary  in other words it is clear that the inquiry into the nature of the jagir under s 2  4   i  is for the purpose of determining the quantum of compensation payable to a jagirdar inasmuch as in the case of a non proprietary jagir the jagirdar is entitled to compensation at the rate of three times the amount of land revenue received by or due to him as an incident of jagir during the five years immediately before the appointed date under s 11  1  while in the case of a proprietary jagir in respect of land held by a permanent holder the jagirdar is entitled to compensation equivalent to three multiples of the assessment fixed for such land  s 11 3  provides for compensation and computation thereof to a jagirdar having any right or interest in any property referred to in s 8 in such an inquiry ordinarily no determination of any rights of the jagirdar to mines or mineral products in a jagir village will be undertaken for  no compensation is payable in respect of any rights to mines and mineral products in a jagir village. there is yet one more aspect emerging from the definition of the expression  proprietary jagir  which leads to the same inference  proprietary jagir  has been defined in s 2 xviii  to mean a jagir in respect of which the jagirdar under the terms of a grant or agreement or by custom or usage is entitled to any rights or interest in the soil. in other words the competent authority holding an inquiry under s 2 4   i  can come to the conclusion that a particular jagir is proprietary if it finds that the jagirdar under the terms of a grant or agreement is entitled to some rights or interest in the soil other than mines or mineral products. these aspects bring out true scope and ambit of the inquiry under sec 2 4  i  and clearly show that the determination of the question whether a jagir is proprietary or nonproprietary does not necessarily involve the determination of the question whether the jagirdar had any rights to mines and mineral products on the appointed date it is true that prima facie the owner of the surface of the land would be entitled to everything beneath the land and ordinarily mines and mineral products would pass with the right to the surface but this would be so in the absence of any reservations made in the grant  if there be reservations or qualifications in regard to mines or mineral products in the grant then these would not pass. in this case also notwithstanding the alleged unqualified grant in favour of the respondent the mamladar s order dated november 24 1959 on which the respondent strongly relies has held that the rights to excavate mica were retained by the state and not granted to the respondent though the material or basis on which it is so held is not available on the record. it is therefore not possible to accept the contention of learned counsel for the respondents that a determination under s 2  4   i  of the act to the effect that a particular jagir is a proprietary one necessarily implies that the grantee is entitled to mines and mineral products in the villages comprised in the grant especially  when having regard to the definition given in s 2 xviii  a jagir could be proprietary without a right to mines and mineral products. in other words our answer to the general question raised above would be that even after the competent authority has declared a particular jagir to be a proprietary one under s 2 4. i  of the act a further inquiry under s 37 2  of the bombay land revenue code into the question whether a jagirdar had any subsisting rights to mines and mineral products in the jagir villages on the appointed date would be competent unless the grant of a right to mines and mineral products  or the actual enjoyment thereof in keeping with the grant happens to  be the basis of the determination under s 2  4   1   of the act. turning to the other specific question raised by counsel for the respondent before us we are clearly of the view that in the facts and circumstances of the case the inquiry initiated by the collector under s 37 4  of the bombay land revenue code will have to be regarded as incompetent misconceived and uncalled for. the main valid objection to the said inquiry is that the condition precedent the existence of which canlead to the initiation of such inquiry is absent here. in other words before the collector can initiate an inquiry under that provision either the state or the individual must put forward a claim to a property or any right in or over the property and it is such claim that is to be inquired into by the collector whose decision subject to a civil suit filed within one year is rendered final. the question in the instant case is whether the respondent by making the two applications one dated october 11 1968 to the collector of sabarkantha and the other dated october 4 1971 to the mamlatdar taluka idar could be said to have put forward or laid a claim to a right to excavate gravel and stone a particular mineral product so as to afford an occasion for the collector to initiate the inquiry. the material on record clearly shows that the respondent could not be said to have done so. it is thus clear that by these two applications the respondent had not put forward any claim as such to excavating gravel and stones for the first time  but had merely requested the making of appropriate entry with regard to his said right which had already been recognised by the state government previously. that being the position there was no occasion for the collector to initiate the inquiry under s 37 2  of the code in fact he had no jurisdiction to do so the condition precedent not being satisfied. moreover having regard to the statement made by counsel for the respondent before us it would be unfair to subject the respondent to the further inquiry under s 37 2  of the code. we find considerable force in this contention. besides while determining the proprietary nature of the grant under s 2 4  1  of the act the competent authority had on evidence led before it alluded among others to the respondent s right to excavate and sell gravel and stones and enjoyment thereof by the respondent. in these circumstances it would be fair and proper that the respondent is not subjected to a further inquiry under s 37 2  of the code so far as his right to excavating gravel and stones from the two villages of kapoda and isarwada is concerned. if and when he prefers a claim to this particular mineral productfrom other villages comprised in his grant or to the other mines ormineral products in all the villages including isarwada and kapodaan inquiry into such claim under s 37 2  could be held but even the decision at such inquiry would be subject to adjudication by a civil court in appropriate proceedings for the final pronouncement on such rights must as is clear from the scheme  of the bombay land revenue code always rest with the civil court. in this view of the matter we feel that the high court was right in its final conclusion whereby it has quashed the inquiry initiated by the collecor under s 37 2  of the code and issued the necessary injunction prayed for by the respondent.

[Facts] leave granted. challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a division bench of the madhya pradesh high court dismissing the writ appeal filed by the appellant on the ground that it was not maintainable. the appeal was filed u s 2 1  of the m p uchacha nyayalay  khand nyaypeth ko appeal  adhiniyam 2005. hereinafter referred to as the  act   it was held that the order was passed in exercise of power of superintendence u art 227 of the constitution of india 1950  in short the  constitution   against which the letters patent appeal is not maintainable. the order of learned single judge was passed on 9 11 2005 against the said order special leave petition was filed which was disposed of by this court by order dated 16 2 2006 we shall refer to the text of the order later. the high court construed as if this court has only waived the limitation for filing of letters patent appeal and there was no direction to consider the case on merits. the earlier order passed by this court dated 22 8 2006 reads as follows   heard. since the impugned order is passed by a learned single judge. the normal remedy is to file a letters patent appeal. since we had entertained the special leave petition against the learned single judge s order it would be appropriate to grant three weeks  time to the petitioner to prefer the lpa which if otherwise free from defect shall be entertained for being considered on merits. the interim order passed by this court shall continue for the aforesaid purpose. the special leave petition is disposed of accordingly. underlined for emphasis. as noted above the prayer in the writ petition was to set aside the decision of the assessing officer.
[Ratio of the decision] that being so the mere fact that the writ petition was styled u art 227 of the constitution is of no consequence. it is the nature of the relief sought for and the controversy involved which determines the article which is applicable. learned counsel for the respondent state on the other hand supported the impugned judgment of the high court. a bare reading of the order shows that the direction was to consider the lpa on merits and time was granted to prefer the lpa within three weeks. the high court was directed to dispose of the lpa on merits if it was otherwise free from defect. the high court was therefore not justified in holding that this court s earlier order only waived the limitation for filing a letters patent appeal. on that score alone the high court s order is unsustainable. in addition the high court seems to have gone by the nomenclature gone by the nomenclature i e the discription given in the writ petition to be one u art 227 of the constitution. the high court did not consider the nature of the controversy and the prayer involved in the writ petition. as noted above the prayer was to quash the order of assessment passed by the assistant commissioner commercial tax levying purchase as well as entry tax. by art 226 the power of issuing prerogative writs possessed by the chartered high courts prior to the commencement of the constitution has been made wider and more extensive and conferred upon every high court. the nature of the exercise of the power under article 226 however remains the same as in the case of the power of issuing prerogative writs possessed by the chartered high courts. the aforesaid decision squarely gets attracted on the facts of the present case. it was open to the respondent to invoke the jurisdiction of the high court both u arts 226 and 227 of the constitution of india. once such a jurisdiction was invoked and when his writ petition was dismissed on merits it cannot be said that the learned single judge had exercised his jurisdiction only u art 226  of the constitution of india. this conclusion directly flows from the relevant averments made in the writ petition and the nature of jurisdiction invoked by the respondent as noted by the learned single judge in his judgment as seen earlier. consequently it could not be said that cl 15 of the letters patent was not attracted for preferring appeal against the judgment of the learned single judge. it is also necessary to note that the appellant being the respondent in letters patent appeal joined issues on merits and did not take up the contention that the letters patent appeal was not maintainable. for all these reasons therefore the primary objection to the maintainability of the letters patent appeal as canvassed by learned counsel for the appellant has to be repelled. point 1 is therefore answered in the affirmative against the appellant and in favour of the respondent. it takes us to the consideration of points arising for our decision on merits. in view of what has been stated above the high court was not justified in holding that the letters patent appeal was not maintainable. in addition a bare reading of this court s earlier order shows that the impugned order is clearly erroneous.

[Facts] the appellant is a trust which wanted to establish a self financing engineering college and submitted an application during 1994 95 to the university of kerala as well as to all india council for technical education  hereinafter called the  aicte. there was an inspection by a team of professors of the university and it recommended favourably when it stated that the facilities provided by the appellant would be sufficient for establish ing an engineering college. the aicte sent a communication on 30 4 1995 stating that on the basis of the observations made by the expert committee and the recommendations made by the central regional committee state level committee and central task force as per the provisions of the aicte regulation dated 30 1 1994 the aicte was granting conditional approval for establishing an engineering and technical college. the abovesaid approval was subject to the fulfilment of specific conditions mentioned in annexure i and the general conditions mentioned in annexure ii to the said letter. in the event of contravention of the conditions guidelines norms and regula tions of the aicte the aicte could withdraw the approval at any time. under the impression that the state govt was to grant permission the appellant requested the state government by letter dated 24 6 1995 for permission to start the college. meanwhile the mahatama gandhi university by their letter dated 31 5 1995 forwarded to the government a list of colleges and courses for affiliation during the academic year 1995 96 the appellant s college was shown as one of the colleges among the affiliated colleges for the said period. the appellant sent a reminder to the government on 26 8 1995 for permission for starting the college for the academic year 1995 96 and ultimately the government refused permission by informing the appellant by a letter dated 16 8 1996 as follows. in inviting your attention to the reference cited i am to inform you that government regret their inability to comply with your request. thereafter the appellant filed writ petition o p no 4612 of 1996 for quashing the said order and for a direction to sanction and establish an engineering college. the learned single judge of the high court by his judgment dated 14 1 1997 allowed the writ petition quashed the above said order of the government dated 16 8 1996 and directed the mahatama gandhi university to consider the appellant s application for permanent affiliation without reference to the above letter of the government and pass appropriate order within 8 weeks from the date of the receipt of a copy of the judgment. the direction to pass a fresh order of affiliation was issued in view of the fact that the university contended before the learned single judge that unless the government granted approval permanent affiliation could not be granted. the government was also directed to reconsider its decision. against the said judgment of the learned single judge the commis sioner and secretary of the government  higher education department  filed writ appeal no 1024 of 1997 the division bench of the high court allowed the appeal and set aside the order of the government and dismissed the writ petition. the division bench however observed that the appellant was at liberty to make a fresh application to the government of kerala for according sanction for setting up the engineering college or to request the government to consider the earlier application for a future academic year. it is against the abovesaid judgment of the division bench that this appeal has been preferred. point 1. on facts the position was that the aicte had granted approval on 30 4 95 expressly stating that this was  on consideration of the observations made by the expert committee and the recommendations made by the central regional committee state level committee central task force as per the provisions of aicte regulations dated 31 10 94  the aicte had granted condition approval and the conditions were specified in annexure. i to the order and the general conditions were enlisted in annexure ii the. state government was directed by the aicte to announce admission in accordance with regulation notified on 20 5 94 and based on the judgment of the supreme court in unnikrishnan v. state of andhra pradesh  1993  1 scc. 645 1993 indlaw sc 1168 the mahatma gandhi university had included this appellant in the list of colleges and courses which were granted affiliation during 1995 96 and the university had written to the state government on 31 5 95 that as per statute 9 7  the  views  of the government were to be sent before granting affili ation. the letter said that for that reason the proposals of the university were being submitted to the government  for necessary action  the appellant had sent a reminder on 26 8 95 the state in its letter dated 16 8 96 to the appellant merely stated  that government regret their inability to comply with your request  no reasons were assigned in the said letter. but the state in its counter filed in the high court tried to explain that the director of technical education had opined that during the year 1995 96 it might not be practicable to start the college for the director could not ascertain the details of the facilities available. it was stated    he could not ascertain the infrastructural facilities provided by the appellant as per the norms prescribed by the all india council of technical education. the all india council for technical education and the mahatma gandhi university have sought for the remarks of the state government. para 4 of the counter affidavit had further stated that the government was not  in a position to take a decision to start new engineering college without properly assessing the necessity of more engineering gradu ates in the state and exploring the possibility of employment oppor tunity in the country to the extent possible.
[Ratio of the decision] the following points arise for consideration    1. whether in view of the judgment of this court in state of tamil nadu   another v. adhiyaman educational   research institute   others  1995  4 scc 104 1995 indlaw sc 1631 the provisions of the aicte act 1987 occupied the field and it was not necessary to obtain the further approval of the government or other authority. whether any statute in the state of kerala if it required such approval would be void. 2  whether the orders of rejection passed by the state government were valid on merits and whether the university should have granted further orders to continue the affiliation solely on the basis of the aicte permission. but in the context of s 10 k  regarding  approval  for starting a technical institution certain aspects of the judgment need to be highlighted. before we refer to the abovesaid judgment it will be necessary to refer to certain provisions of the aicte act and the relevant regulations. the abovesaid act was an act to provide for the establishment of all india council for technical education with a view to the proper planning and coordinated development of the technical education system throughout the country the promotion of qualitative improvement of such education in relation to planned quantitative growth and the regulation and proper maintenance of norms and standards in the technical education system and for matters connected therewith. sub cl 5 of regulation 8 requires the regional office to arrange visits by an expert committee constituted by the council which is to forward its recommendations to the council. sub cl 6 of regulation 8 states that the state level committee constituted under regulation 9 4  is to consider the recommendations of the state government and others mentioned in regulation 8 4  and that it is to make its recommendations to the central task force constituted under regulation 9 5  and consider the recommendations of the state level committee and send its recommendations to the member secretary of the council. sub cl 10 of regulation 8 states that the decision of the council shall be communicated to the state government concerned or the ugc as the case may be the concerned university or the state board the regional office and the applicant before 30th april in case the application was made before the preceding 31st december. the tamil nadu case. we shall now refer to the above judgment dealing with the question of  approval  for establishing technical institutions under s 10 k  of the aicte act. the tamil nadu rules of 1976 made under the 1976 act had no doubt excluded technical institutions from the purview of the rules but this court pointed out that the rules were capable of being amended so as to extend to such technical institutions and that if they were so extended the state act of 1976 and the rules would require  approval  by the state government and that would be void. it was stated that inasmuch as the state act   will overlap and will be in conflict with the provisions of the central act in various areas. granting approval for starting new technical institution. inspection of technical institution             which are matters covered by the central act. this court then referred to the madras university act 1923 it was held that s 10 of the central act dealt with various matters  including granting approval for starting new technical institutions  and that so far as these matters were concerned. it is not the university act and the university but it is the central act and the council created under it which will have the jurisdiction. to that extent after the coming into force of the central act the provisions of the university act will be deemed to have become unenforceable. thus in the two passages set out above this court clearly held that because of s 10 k  of the central act which vested the powers of granting approval in the council the t n act of 1976 and the university act 1923 could not deal with any questions of  approval  for establishment of technical institutions. all that was necessary was that under the regulations the aicte council had to consult them. statutory powers of the state of kerala and the m g university. the question is as to how far the judgment in the tamil nadu case is to be applied in the state of kerala. we are not inclined to agree. we have already pointed out under point 1 that in the tamil nadu case s 10 k  of the aicte act was referred to and the power of  approval  for establishing a technical institution was considered in our opinion even if there was a state law in the state of kerala which required the approval of the state government for establishing technical institutions such a law would have been repugnant to the aicte act and void to that extent as held in the tamil nadu case. it will be noticed that cl 9 7  of the statute required that before the university took a decision on  affiliation  it had to ascertain the  views  of the state government. the reference to the commission in the above cl 9 7  is to the commission of inspection appointed by the university. sub cl  1  of cl  9  of the statute required  verification of the facilities that may exist for starting the new colleges course  the commission was to inspect the site verify the title deeds as regards the proprietary right of the management over the land  and buildings if any  offered building accommodation provided if any assets of the management constitution of the registered body and all other relevant matters sub cl  2  of cl  9  stated that the affiliation  shall depend upon the fulfilment by the management of all the conditions for the satisfactory establishment and maintenance of the proposed institutional courses of studies and on the reports of inspection by the commission or commissions which the university may appoint for the purpose. as held in the tamil nadu case the central act of 1987 and in particular s 10 k  occupied the field relating the  grant of approvals  for establishing technical institutions and the provisions of the central act alone were to be complied with. so far as the provisions of the mahatma gandhi university act or its statutes were concerned and in particular statute 9 7  they merely required the university to obtain the  views  of the state government. that could not be characterised as requiring the  approval  of the state government. if indeed the university statute could be so inter preted such a provision requiring approval of the state government would be repugnant to the provisions of s 10 k  of the aicte act 1987 and would again be void. as pointed out in the tamil nadu case there were enough provisions in the central act for consultation by the council of the aicte with various agencies including the state governments and the universities concerned. the state level committee and the central regional committees contained various experts and state representatives. in case of difference of opinion as between the various consultees the aicte would have to go by the views of the central task force. these were sufficient safeguards for ascertaining the views of the state governments and the universities. no doubt the question of affiliation was a different matter and was not covered by the central act but in the tamil nadu case it was held that the university could not impose any conditions inconsistent with the aicte act or its regulation or the conditions imposed by the aicte therefore the procedure for obtaining the affiliation and any conditions which could be imposed by the university could not be inconsistent with the provisions of the central act. the university could not therefore in any event have sought for  approval  of the state government. the university statute 9 7  merely required that the  views  of the state government be obtained before granting affiliation and this did not amount to obtaining  approval  if the university statute required  approval  it would have been repugnant to the aicte act. point 1 is decided accordingly. point 2. factual position and pleadings in this case. the state government in its counter then gave the names of the existing colleges and their location. we have already referred to these details. it also observed that there was widespread student prospects against starting new colleges and it was necessary to be cautious in the matter of starting new engineering colleges. it was stated that government could not initially take a decision on the appellant s affiliation because of elections and that matter being one of  major policy  the government had subsequently  taken a policy decision not to sanction any affiliation to such colleges either in the private sector or in the public sector for this year  these are stated to be the reasons for the government s rejection by letter dated 16 8 96. state government s refusal to grant permission is illegal and void on merits. as already stated in view of the judgment of this court in tamil nadu case it is obvious that there is no need to approach the state of kerala for its approval for starting the engineering colleges. there is no power vested in the state under any state law to grant approval and even if it was so vested it would have been void in view of tamil nadu case. this ground of repugnancy alone would be sufficient to quash the state government s letter dated 16 8 1996 refusing to give their approval. even on merits the reasons given by the state government in its counter are not tenable in law. the director of technical education of the state was a member of the state level committee as per regulation 9 4  of the aicte regulations. the secretary technical education of the state of kerala was also a member of that committee. the aicte s approval dated 30 4 95 showed that the approval had been given by the state level com mittee of which they were obviously members. it is therefore not under standable how the director had given a contrary opinion to the state government. regulation 8 4  of aicte only required calling for the  com ments recommendations  of the state government and of the university. in case there was difference between the state government university or the regional committee the central task force was to make a final recommen dation under regulation. 8 4  here. the letter of approval of the aicte dated 30 4 95 showed that the central task force had given its approval. the said approval was based also on the inspection by the expert committee of the aicte hence the state government in its counter could not have relied upon any contrary opinion of the director of technical education. if the state government had any other valid objections its only remedy was to place its objections before the aicte council under the aicte act or before the committees e g. state level committee etc. the so called  policy  of the state as mentioned in the counter affidavit filed in the high court was not a ground for refusing approval. therefore the state could not have any  policy  outside the aicte act and indeed if it had a policy it should have placed the same before the aicte and that too before the latter granted permission. once that procedure laid down in the aicte act and regulations had been followed under regulation 8 4  and the central task force had also given its favourable recommendations there was no scope for any further objection or approval by the state. we may however add that if thereafter any fresh facts came to light after an approval was granted by the aicte or if the state felt that some conditions attached to the permission and required by the aicte to be complied with were not complied with then the state government could always write to the aicte to enable the latter to take appropriate action. decision of university in not granting further or fined affiliation wrong on merits. admittedly the university s inspection report was in favour of the appellant. this is clear from the appellant s letter dated 31 5 95 to the state government. the only requirement as per the statute 9 7  was for the university to obtain the  views  of the state government. obtaining the  views  of the state government as already stated did not amount to obtaining its  approval  procedure and conditions for affiliation could not be inconsistent with the provisions of the central act in particular s 10 k  of the regulation and the university could not seek approval of government. the university was also one of the agencies consulted by the council of the aicte under regulation 8 once that was over and approval was granted by the aicte if there was any default on the part of the college in compliance with the conditions of approval the only remedy for the univer sity was to bring those facts to the notice of the aicte so that the latter could take appropriate action. reliance for the respondent was placed upon the subsequent report of the syndicate dated 7 8 97 this report no doubt pointed out that the appellant had not complied with certain conditions mentioned in the approval dated 30 4 95 granted by the aicte assuming certain fresh facts had come to the notice of the university it could only place the said facts before the aicte. thus the university ought to have considered the grant of final or further affiliation without waiting for any approval from the state govern ment and should have acted on the basis of the permission granted by aicte and other relevant factors in the university act or statutes which are not inconsistent with the aicte act or its regulations. for the aforesaid reasons we set aside the judgment of the division bench of the high court and uphold the reasoning of the learned single judge in his judgment in op 4612 96 dated 14 1 1997 we hold that the approval of the aicte was sufficient we do not also think that it was necessary for the learned single judge to direct the state government to reconsider its decision. the learned single judge s order quashing the letter of the state government dated 16 8 96 is upheld. the direction to the mahatama gandhi university to consider the application of the appellant for final affiliation or continuance of affiliation is confirmed and this is to be done on the basis of the approval granted by the aicte dated 30 4 95 or any other relevant factors in the university act or its statutes which are not inconsistent with the aicte act or its regulations. the petitioner was not a party in the high court of kerala and this special leave petition was filed with leave of this court. we find that the petitioner has already filed a writ petition in the delhi high court namely cwp no 952 of 1998 and the same is pending. it will be for the petitioner to have the said matter disposed of by the high court of delhi. therefore this special leave petition is dismissed as premature.

[Facts] this civil appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and decree dated 29th november 1977 rendered by a single judge of the gujarat high court in second appeal no 348 of 1973 which arose out of regular civil suit no 921 of 1966 filed in the court of joint civil judge baroda  civil court  by the appellant herein as plaintiff against respondents 1 and 2 herein. defendants 1 and 2 for redemption of suit properties which were mortgaged as security for certain monies borrowed by the plaintiff from defendant l under two deeds of mortgage executed in the year 1961. plaintiff filed the suit for redemption of the said mortgages in the year 1966 defendant 2 brother of defendanti had been joined in that suit on the allegation that the latter was put in possession of mortgage properties by the former subsequent to the coming into existence of the mortgages. that suit was resisted by the defendants each of them having filed separate written statements which in sub stance did not differ from each other. the defence in those written statements was that defendant l and his family members had become tenants of the suit properties in the year 1959 1960 and had continued to be such tenants at the time of mortgage deeds executed in respect of those properties in the year 1961 and thereafter. it was also claimed therein that they had become owners of the said properties when the plaintiff in the year 1962 sold those properties to defendant 1 by receiving a sum of rs 4 400  as consideration for the sale. even if the sale of said properties in favour of defendant l it was asserted therein was not proved they continued to be tenants of the said properties on the date of suit as they were tenants even before the date of coming into existence of the mortgages. the issue relating to their claim that they were tenants of the said properties  the agricultural lands as urged therein had to be referred by the civil court to the mamlatdar under section 85 a of the bombay tenancy and agricultural lands act 1948   the bt   al act  for recording his finding thereon and the suit had to be stayed pending receipt of the finding thereon so that the suit may be finally disposed of on the basis of such finding. the civil court notwithstanding the defence of the defendants taken in their written statements that the suit had to be stayed for obtaining the finding on their claim of tenancy under the bt   al act framed the issues in the suit on the basis of the pleadings of the parties and after trial recorded its findings thereon. such findings were firstly that the defendants had failed to prove that the suit properties were sold in favour of defendant l subsequent to the giving of security of those properties in his favour under the mortgage deeds  secondly that the defendants had failed to prove the past tenancy of the suit properties on its view that what was pleaded by them in the written statements was tenancy prior to the date of filing of the suit  and thirdly that the mortgages of the suit properties were mortgages by  conditional sale. on the basis of findings so recorded by the civil. court it also made a preliminary decree in favour of the plaintiff for redemption of the suit properties. though the defendants filed an appeal in the court of the district judge baroda against the said preliminary decree that appeal came to be dismissed on august 17 1972 affirming the judgment and decree of the civil court. however the defendants questioned the judgments and decrees of the trial court and the appellate court by filing a second appeal against the same in the high court of gujarat. it is the judgment and order of the learned single judge of the high court by which he allowed the second appeal and remanded the suit which is appealed against in this civil appeal of the plaintiff as is stated at the outset.
[Ratio of the decision] no controversy is raised in this appeal as regards the findings of the civil court that the deeds of mortgage executed by the plaintiff in respect of the suit properties were mortgages by conditional sale. specific case pleaded by the plaintiff in the plaint as regards possession of the suit properties held by tenants was that their possession which was with the plaintiff was given to defendant l on the execution of the deeds of mortgage by conditional sale in his favour. in any event it was not the case of the plaintiff that defendant l was a tenant of the suit properties and hc surrendered his possession of the suit properties either expressly or impliedly and the possession so obtained by the plaintiff was re delivered to defendant l in pursuance of the mortgages by conditional sale executed in his favour. however learned counsel appearing for the defendants  respondents sought to refute the arguments advanced on half of the plaintiff appellant. questions which arise for our consideration and decision in the light of the aforesaid arguments of learned counsel for the contesting parties admit of their formulations thus   1  does the lease hold of a tenant  lessee  in a property merge in mortgage security if the same property is given by the landlord  lessor  to the tenant  lessee  as a mortgage security under a mortgage by conditional sale as would debar the tenant from desisting the suit of the landlord  mortgagor for recovery of possession of such property by obtaining a decree for redemption of the mortgage. 2  when a plea of tenancy is raised with regard to suit property an agricultural land by a defendant who claims to be a tenant of such property under the bt   al act and seeks a reference of that issue by the civil court to the mamlatdar under that act for obtaining a finding thereon can the civil court decide such issue by itself and proceed to decide the suit on the basis of the finding thereon. as the said questions could be dealt with appropriately with reference to the statutory provisions which bear upon them it would be convenient to advert to such statutory provisions here. we shall now proceed to deal with the aforesaid questions. question  1. interests of the lessee and the lessor in the whole of the property become vested at the same time in one person in the same right because of section 11 l d  of the t p act. what is enunciated in section 111  d  of the t p act cannot be doubted is the doctrine of merger. merger takes place when a lesser estate is merged or drowned in a greater estate. lease hold held by a tenant or a lessee being a lesser estate and the right of reversion of the landlord  lessor  being a higher estate the lessee s lease hold right in respect of the property merges in reversion when that right of reversion i e  the landlord s  lessor s  right of reversion comes to the tenant or lessee which happens when the landlord having a right to sell his reversion to the tenant holding the lease hold sells the whole of it to the tenant  lessee  but in view of the arguments advanced on behalf of the plaintiff appellant what has to be seen is if the landlord of a property the lease hold of which is already with the tenant gives that very property as mortgage security to the tenant  lessee  by executing a mortgage by a conditional sale for the amount borrowed by him from the latter does merger of lease hold right in that mortgage security occur. when the landlord mortgages the lease hold property of the tenant to the tenant himself he does not part with the right of reversion which he has in respect of that property. if that be so merger of lease hold estate in reversion cannot arise inasmuch as there cannot be any inconsistency or incompatibility in one person being the tenant and also the mortgagee of the same property for in that event instead of the tenant paying rent to the landlord he may adjust it against the amount claimable by him as a mortgagee from the landlord. moreover if a lessee of a property takes a mortgage of the sum property from the landlord it would be unreasonable to attribute to a tenant the intention to surrender the tenancy and to invoke the sophisticated doctrine of implied surrender as has been held by the gujarat high court in patel atmaram nathudas v. babubhai keshavlal 1974 indlaw guj 88. in the present case as has already been pointed out by us the plaintiff appellant did not claim that the defendants or any of them were in possession of the suit properties as tenants and there was a surrender by them of the possession either expressly or impliedly as would make the court to come to the conclusion that the possession of the suit properties with the defendants was surrendered by them pursuant to the mortgage by conditional sale executed in their favour. if that be the position there can be no bar for the defendants to claim the right to continue in possession of the suit properties as tenants under the bt. al act even if the plaintiff could obtain a decree for redemption of the suit properties which relief was sought in the suit. the decision of this court in shah mathuradas case 1976 indlaw sc 400  supra  and g appalaswamy case 1984 indlaw sc 314  supra  sought to be relied upon by learned counsel for the appellant  plaintiff in support of his arguments that there was a merger of the leasehold right of the tenant in the suit properties when he took mortgages of those properties from the landlord as would deny him the right to continue in possession of those properties as a tenant instead of supporting his argument would go against it as we shall presently point out. it was agreed under the terms of the mortgage deed that no interest need be paid by the respondent since the premises the possession of which was given to the tenant pursuant to the mortgage was to be enjoyed in lieu of interest payable on the mortgage. when suit for redemption of the premises was filed by the respondent the appellant claimed that after redemption he was entitled to remain in possession of the premises because of the subsistence of his previous tenancy right. this court held that the mortgage deed established beyond doubt that there was no subsistence or continuation of lease in that there was delivery of possession by the tenant to the landlord immediately before the mortgage and redelivery of possession to the tenant of the premises made by the landlord was pursuant to the mortgage as a mortgagee and not as a tenant. secondly this court held that the appellant was not entitled to retain after redemption possession of the mortgage property by reason of his previous right to be in its possession as a tenant. in the present case as we have pointed out earlier when no surrender of possession of the suit properties had taken place before the coming into existence of mortgages in favour of the lessor  mortgagor when no redelivery of possession had been given pursuant to the mortgage to the tenant the decision under consideration can be of no assistance to the appellant. since the following observations in the said case confirm the view we have taken on non merger they can be excerpted   for a merger to arise it is necessary that a lesser estate and a higher estate should merge in one person at one and the same time and in the same right and no interest in the property should remain outside. in the case of a lease the estate that is in the lessor is a reversion. in the case of a mortgage the estate that is outstanding is the equity of redemption of the mortgagor. therefore there cannot be a merger of lease and mortgage in respect of the same property since neither of them is a higher or lesser estate than the other. hence the lease hold of a tenant  lessee  in a property does not merge in mortgage security of that property even if it is given  to. him by the landlord  lessor  on a mortgage by conditional sale as would debar the tenant from desisting the suit of the landlord mortgagor for recovery of possession of such property by obtaining decree for redemption of the mortgage. question  2. we find it difficult to accept the said argument and the aforesaid decision of this court relied upon in support thereof can render no assistance. the only question which arose for decision in topandas case 1963 indlaw sc 379  supra  was whether on a proper interpretation of section 28 of the bombay rents hotel and lodging house rates control. act 1947. the rents control act  the court of small causes. bombay had exclusive jurisdiction in dealing with the suit out of which the appeal had arisen. there the respondent  a partnership firm was in possession as a tenant of a shop at mulji jetha market bombay. it instituted a suit in the bombay city civil court  not the court of small causes bombay  praying for a declaration that it was in lawful possession of the shop and the appellants had no right to enter into or remain in possession of the shop and for grant of an injunction restraining the appellants from interfering with the respondent s possession. the plaint averments were that appellant 1  defendant 1  had appointed the respondent as his commission agent for the sale of the appellants  cloth in the shop in question. the agreement was to remain in force for a period of four years. pursuant to the said agreement the respondent had allowed the appellants their family members servants and agents to visit the shop only for the purpose of looking after the business of commission agency. the appellants despite being asked not to visit the shop after the expiry of the period in the concerned agreement they continued to visit the shop and were preventing the respondent from having access to its various articles such as stock in trade books of account furniture fixtures etc. thus according to the plaint the appellants who  were merely licensees had no right to enter into the shop after the expiry of the period of licence envisaged in the agreement. the appeal in this court had arisen out of the finding recorded on that issue and in dealing with that matter this court had to consider the true effect of sub section  1  of section 28 of the rents control act to find whether it means that a defendant if raises a claim or question as to the existence of relationship of landlord and tenant between him and plaintiff the jurisdiction of the civil court is ousted even though the plaintiff pleaded that there is only exclusive jurisdiction to decide the case with the court of small causes bombay. dealing with the matter this court referred to the general principle which covers the question of jurisdiction at the inception of suits which was not disputed thus   the plaintiff chooses his forum and files his suit. if he establishes the correctness of his facts he will get his relief from the forum chosen. if    he frames his suit in a manner not warranted by the facts and goes for his relief to a court which cannot grant him relief on the true facts he will have his suit dismissed. then there will be no question of returning the plaint for presentation to the proper court for the plaint as framed would not justify the other kind of court to grant him the relief. if it is found on a trial on the merits so far as this issue of jurisdiction goes that the facts alleged by the plaintiff are not true and the facts alleged by the defendants are true and that the case is not cognizable by the court there will be two kinds of orders to be passed. if the jurisdiction is only one relating to territorial limits or pecuniary limits the plaint will be ordered to be returned for presentation to the proper court. if on the other hand it is found that having regard to the nature of the suit it is not cognizable by the class of court to which the court belongs the plaintiff s suit will have to be dismissed in its entirety. by referring to the material portion of section 28 of the rents control act the argument made on behalf of the appellants was found by this court to be untenable by stating thus   we do not think that the section says or intends to say that the plea of the defendant will determine or change the forum. it proceeds on the basis that exclusive jurisdiction is conferred on certain courts to decide all questions or claims under the act as to parties between whom there is or was a relationship of landlord and tenant. it does not invest those courts with exclusive power to try questions of title such as questions as between the rightful owner and a trespasser or a licensee for such questions do not arise under the act. if therefore the plaintiff in his plaint does not admit a relation which would attract any of the provisions of the act on which the exclusive jurisdiction given under s 28 depends we do not think that the defendant by his plea can force the plaintiff to go to a forum where on his averments he cannot go. the interpretation canvassed for by the appellants will give rise to anomalous results  for example the defendant may in every case force the plaintiff to go to the court of small causes and secondly if the court of small causes finds against the defendant s plea the plaint may have to be returned for presentation to the proper court for a second time when one has regard to the provisions in part ii it seems reasonably clear that the exclusive jurisdiction conferred by s 28 is really dependent on an existing or previous relationship of landlord and tenant and on claims arising under the act as between such parties. section 70 of the bt   al act to which we have adverted already imposes a duty on the mamlatdar to decide whether a person is an agriculturist or a tenant or a protected tenant or a permanent tenant when such person claims to be so under that act. further section 85 of the bt   al act to which also we have already adverted in unequivocal terms says that in deciding any issue which is required to be decided by the mamlatdar under the bt   al act no civil court has jurisdiction to decide it. furthermore section 85a as it stood prior to its amendment by gujarat amendment act no 5 in the year 1973 and as stands thereafter requires that if any suit instituted in civil court involves the question of tenancy of  present  or  past  as the case may be the same being required to be decided or dealt with by an authority competent under the bt   al act the civil court has to stay the suit and refer the issue to such competent authority for determination and after receiving the decision thereon to dispose of the suit in accordance with such decision. thus the provisions in the bt   al act give no scope or room to think that the plea of tenancy if raised by the defendants in a suit in a civil court the same could be decided by the civil court. thus we are constrained to answer the question in the negative by agreeing with the view expressed by the single judge of the high court in this regard in his judgment and order under appeal. consequently the judgment and order under appeal does not call for our interference.

[Facts] we have heard learned counsel on both sides. the admitted facts are that the respondents through their agents had registered trade mark  raleigh  and other trade marks  12 marks  under the indian merchandise marks act 1889  4 of 1989  and the trade marks act 1940  5 of 1940  the trade and merchandise marks act 1958  43 of 1958   for short the  act  which came into force with effect from october 3 1958 has repealed the predecessor act and now the act is in operation. the respondents entered into an agreement with sudhir kumar sen on november 3 1948 to render technical know how to the indian company to be formed which would manufacture bicycles and market them under raleigh s indian trade marks. pursuant thereto a company called sen raleigh limited came into existence which manufactured cycles with technical assistance by the respondents raleigh industries of u k and marketed the bicycles with a brand name and trade marks belonging to the respondents. on april 24 1954 sen. raleigh was recorded as permitted users of the trade marks. by agreement dated december 29 1962 sen raleigh and the respondents agreed that sen raleigh was registered user for further period up to 1976 sen raleigh was taken over by the government of india on september 8 1975 under the idr act and the government took over the management of sen raleigh limited. the agreement dated december 29 1962 was modified and the respondents were given option to terminate the agreement. an agreement dated december 20 1976 was entered into between the appellant as registered user and the respondent in respect of 12 trade marks for a period of 5 years. on march 28 1978 joint application by sen raleigh and the appellant duly signed by the respondent as proprietor and sen raleigh limited as registered user came to be made before the registrar of trade marks. on october 24 1980 sen raleigh was nationalized and got vested in the appellant corporation by publication of the notification under idr act. on march 5 1982 the respondent wrote a letter to the appellant that in the absence of a new agreement they were instructing their advocate to prevent the appellant by restraint proceedings to use the trade mark effective from april 1 1982. on march 24 1982 the appellant made an application under sections 32 46 and 56 of the act against the respondents in the high court of calcutta in suit no 266 92 pleading inter alia that the respondents had failed to provide technical assistance by passing the technical know how to sen raleigh after november 1 1976 neither the appellant nor sen raleigh were registered users of the trade mark after november 1 1976. u s 48 2  of the act up to the date of one month before filing that rectification application. a continuous period of 5 years or longer had passed and the trade mark had not been bona fide used by the respondent. having regard to the extended nature of non user of the concerned trade mark after november 1 1976 any further use of the said trade marks by the respondents was likely to deceive and cause confusion to the trade and public alike in india etc. simultaneously an application for registration of three trade marks an their favour was filed by the appellant on march 25 1982. by proceedings dated june 13 1984 the registrar of trade marks informed the appellant that the registered user s applications were abandoned since the appellant failed to comply with the statutory requirements. the learned single judge dismissed the application by his judgment dated september 13 1990 holding inter alia that any proprietor mentioned in s 46 1  b  of the act extends to bona fide user other than registered users. special circumstances as a defense were available to the respondent for non user  even after 1979 the supply technical know how by the respondent was not totally absent. after termination of the collaboration and user agreement between the appellant and the respondents it was likely to cause confusion and deception amongst the trade and public. the conduct of the respondents was not violative of s 32 b  and  c  the court in those circumstances declined to rectify the trade mark and strike it off from the register of trade marks. on appeal the division bench in appeal no 13 91 confirmed the same holding that on and from october 25 1980 the respondent had allowed and permitted the appellant to manufacture bicycles etc according its specifications and to pass off the goods under their trade marks. though the collaboration and registered user agreements stood expired from october 31 1981 no agreement came to be executes nor continued to use the specifications on technical know how. there is no specific bar for an unregistered lincesee to use registered trade mark so long as there is a connection in the course of trade between the licenser and the lincesee. the appellant was unable to prove that there had been no such user of the trade mark for a continuous period of 61 months or longer and the lack of bona fide intention the expression  by any registered proprietors in s 46 1  b  should not be restricted to user by proprietor or registered user who should also include bona fide or authorized users the legislature did not intend to register proprietor to be deprived of their property at the instance of user whose use is unregistered. the expression therefore should not be restricted to user by the proprietor himself or any registered user but should also take into account bona fide authorized user. non registration of the user agreement by sen raleigh and the appellant was due to the default of the latter. the appellant had not taken any steps to withdraw registered user applications and as such should not be permitted to take such a contradictory stand of applying for rectification at the same time. the power u s 46 is discretionary. in view of the appellant s conduct it was taking advantage of its own wrong. the discretion therefore was not to be extended in favour of the appellant. thus this appeal by special leave.
[Ratio of the decision] in view of the diverse contentions the question arises  whether the high court was right in refusing to rectify and strike off the trade marks of the respondents from the register of trade marks. it would therefore be clear that a permitted use of the trade mark should be done under sub s  1  of section 48 it. should be either by the registered proprietor of the trade mark or a person other than the registered proprietor registered u s 48 1  to use the trade mark by operation of sub section  2  an un registered person u s 48 1  or a person who did not register u s  1  of s 48 shall not be deemed to be a registered user for the purpose of s 46 or any other law. the high court recorded a finding and it is not disputed across the bar that the appellant had entered into an agreement with sen raleigh which was a permitted user and used the trade mark till november 1 1976 and thereafter by registered user agreement dated december 20 1976 used trade mark for a period of 5 years. it is not in dispute that till date of filing of the application the appellant used the trade mark in passing off the bicycles under the trade mark of the respondent. the question therefore is  whether the appellant must be deemed to be bona fide user of the trade mark though there was no agreement nor was it registered as permitted user u s 48 1. on admitted position and in the facts and circumstances we are of the view that the appellant was a ago user of the trade mark of the respondent in passing off the bicycles under the trade mark of the respondent who admittedly is a registered proprietor. it is true as held by this court that to get a trade mark registered without any intention to use it in relation to any goods but merely to make money out of it by selling it to others the right to use it as a commodity would be trafficking in that trade mark. it requires to be prevented and prohibited. the court would not lend assistance to such registered proprietors of the trade mark. there must be real trade connection between the proprietor of the trade and licensee of the goods and the intention to use the trade mark must exist at the date of the application for registration of trade mark and such intention must be genuine and bona fide and continue to subsist in order to disprove the charge of trafficking in trade mark. it is a question of fact in every case. the question is  whether the trade connection exists to dispel the charge of trafficking in the trade mark. it is seen that preceding the nationalization of the cycle manufacturing industry under the idr act the respondent had a collaboration agreement with sen raliegh who was a registered user under section 48 from him the appellant came to succeed by statutory operation. it was therefore not a case of getting the trade mark registered under the predecessor act and continuing under the act for trafficking of the trade mark. it is true that u s 43 1  either the registered proprietor or a permitted person is required to register as permitted user. the benefit of s 46 would be available during the period for which the agreement registered and user continued in furtherance thereof. it appears that even an unregistered licensee so long as there is unbroken connection in the course of the trade between the licensor and the passing off lincesee s goods under the trade mark there would be sufficient connection in the course of the trade between the proprietor and bona fide user of the trade mark by unregistered user. it must therefore be held that though the deemed presumption under sub s  2  of s 48 is referable to the permitted user or the registered user and it does not extend to unregistered permitted user the connecting link of passing off the goods between the licensor s trade mark and the lincesee should bona fide be with the permission or consent which may be express or implied by long course of dealings. it would connect the registered proprietor and the user of the trade mark by the unregistered lincesee. the appellant must be presumed by course of conduct that he is a bona fide user for the purpose of s 46 1  b. though there was a ban on impart of the raleigh cycles manufactured outside india and passed off under the registered mark of the respondents as a registered proprietor the circumstances do not attracted sub section  3  of s 46 to relieve the respondents to establish non user but on the facts of this case we have the admitted position that sen raleigh admittedly was a registered user through which the appellant had bona fide used the registered trade mark of the registered proprietor there is no discontinuance or non use of the trade mark by the respondent to establish the special circumstances in this case. it is also not necessary to go into the question whether the application filed by the appellant u s 48 1  and its pendency would be a special circumstance in favour of the respondent. suffice it to hold that subs  3  of s 46. is not attracted to the facts in this case. the question then is  whether the discretion has been properly exercised by both the division bench as well the single judge in refusing to take off the trade mark from the register by striking off trade mark from the register of the registrar of trade marks. it is true that while exercising discretion the court u s 46 of the act should take into consideration not only commercial interest of the parties but also public interest  in para 21 82 at page 386 of the law of trade marks and passing off by p narayanan  4th ed   it is stated that the court or the registrar has discretion in granting or refusing an application for rectification. ordinarily however the mark will be expunged  taken off  when the factual circumstances necessary for the removal are established unless it is shown that the case comes within the exceptions provided in the sub section  3  the high court refused to exercise the discretion to strike off the trade mark from the register. it is seen that the appellant had not abandoned at any point of time the use of the trade mark of the respondent registered proprietor till filing of the application. though the appellant has not used the trade mark by itself since 1954 and after the expiry of the permitted use by sen raleigh until the notice was issued by the respondent directing the appellant not to use the trade mark the appellant came to use the same in passing off bicycles manufactured by it under trade mark of the respondent. it is not relevant for the purpose of s 46 1  b  whether the bicycles were manufactured with the assistance of technical know how passed on by sen raleigh or the permitted user. suffice it to state that the appellant as a fact had used the trade mark of the respondent in passing off the bicycles manufactured by it. the high court in our view declined for good reasons to rectify the trade mark under section act b  of the act. we are also not persuaded to take a different view from that of the high court. in these circumstances we are of the view that the high court has properly exercised its discretion and refused to rectify and strike off the trade mark from the register of trade marks of the registrar.

[Facts] the respondent no. i was tried before the court of sessions  visakhapatnam for offences under s  120 b  indian penal code  s  409  s  477 a. and s  471 read with s  467  i p c. while respondent no  2 was tried for an offence under s  120 b and for offences under ss. 409 read with s  109  477 a and 471 read with s  467  i p c. each of the respondents was convicted of the first two offences  but. the respondent no. i alone was convicted of the other two offences. various sentences were passed against them by the additional sessions judge  visakhapatnam  who presided over the court. the respondents preferred appeals before the high court challenging their convictions and sentences. the state on the other hand preferred an application for revision under s  439  cr. p c  for the enhancement of the sentences passed on the respondents. the high court allowed the two appeals  acquitted the respondents and dismissed the application for revision preferred by the state. the state of andhra pradesh has come up before this court in appeal by obtaining special leave under art. 136 of the constitution. the prosecution case in so far as it is material for the decision of this appeal is as follows. in the year 1929 the andhra engineering co   which was originally a partnership firm formed by one d l n  raju was converted into a private limited  company with its headquarters at visakhapatnam. we shall refer to this company throughout as the aeco. it obtained licences from the government under the electricity act for supply of electrical energy to visakhapatnam  anakapalli and some other places. as the aeco did not have the necessary capital to undertake the work raju floated in the year 1933 a public limited company called visakhapatnam electric supply corporation ltd    and another in the year 1936 called the anakapalli electric supply corporation ltd. the aeco transferred its licences for the supply of electrical energy to the consumers of visakhapatnam to vesco and similarly transferred to aeco the licence to supply electrical energy to consumers at anakapalli. the aeco was appointed managing agent for each of these corporations under separate agreements. some time later other industrial concerns  the andhra cements ltd   vi jayawada and the east coast ceremics. rajahmurthy were started apparently by raju himself  and the aeco was appointed the managing agent of each of these concerns. the original managing agency agreement in favour of aeco with respect to vesco was for a period of 15 years i e   from 1933 to 1948 and was later renewed for the remaining term of the currency of the licence granted by the government under the electricity act. a mention may be made of the fact that in june  1952 the vesco undertaking was acquired by the government under the provisions of the   electricity undertaking acquisition act  but nothing turns on it. the vesco had its own board of directors while the aeco had also its own separate board of directors. the vesco had no managing director but at each meeting of its board of directors one of the directors used to be elected chairman. the same practice was followed at the meeting of the general body of the shareholders. the aeco on the other band always had a managing director  first of whom was d l n  raju. he died in the year 1939 and was succeeded by r k n g  raju  an advocate of rajahmundry. this person  however  did not shift to visakhapatnam on his becoming the managing director but continued to stay most of the time at rajahmundry. the aeco as managing agents of vesco had appointed in the year 1939 one d v  appala raju  a trusted employee  as its representative and as the secretary of vesco. in 1944 this person resigned from his appointments and started his own business in radio and electrical goods in the name of d  brothers. he was succeeded by t  visweswara rao  p w  6  an employee of the aeco. eventually their choice fell on g  v  subba raju  p  w  25  a resident of manchili  who held a large number of shares in the aeco and who was  besides  related to r k n g  raju by marriage. it is said that this person has not received much education and knows only bow to sign his name in english. he was assured that by consenting to become the managing director be would not be required to discharge onerous duties and that the respondent no. i would look to all the affairs of vesco. he was also told that apart from signing important papers which may be sent to him by the respondent no  i from time to time to manchili or wherever be might be would have no work to do. he agreed and was elected managing director of aeco in the middle of 1948. upon this understanding he accepted the position offered to him. the vesco used to receive large amounts of money from high tension power consumers such as the railways  k  g  hospital  the port administration  the andhra university etc. by cheques. but domestic consumers usually paid their bills in cash to the bill collectors who used to hand over their collections to the respondent no  2. the respondent no  2 was asked by the respondent no. i to maintain a private note book. in  that book payments which used to be made by respondent no  2 on the basis of slips issued by the respondent no. i  used to be noted and the amount totalled up at the end of the day. this amount was posted in vesco s cash handover book as   by safe  indicating that this amount was kept in the safe  though in fact it was not. on the basis of the entries in the handover book the final accounts were written up. i opened four personal accounts in different banks  including the imperial bank of india. when the respondent no. i had to issue a personal cheque on any of these banks he used to ask the second respondent to send an equivalent amount to the bank concerned for being credited to his account. these amounts also used to be noted in the private note book and entered. another thing which the respondent no. i initiated was opening a heading in the ledger called  advance purchase of materials. amounts which had been misappropriated used to be posted therein though in fact no orders were placed for any material. it may be mentioned that subba raju used to visit visakhapatnam twice a month and check up the account books. at that time it used to be represented to him that the amounts which were shown to be in the safe and not found therein  had been sent to the bank for being deposited. apparently subba raju was fully satisfied with this and other explanations and  therefore  he appointed one c  s  raju  who was the manager of andhra cements to supervise over the affairs of vesco apparently because of this a new method of misappropriation was adopted by the respondents by starting in the vesco account books  an account called  suspense account. a lakh of rupees passed through that account. amounts which were misappropriated used to find their way in this account. a new cash book was also said to have been prepared by the conspirators with the object of covering up the misappropriations which had been made. subba raju was not satisfied with the nature of supervision exercised by c  s  raju over the affairs of vesco because he used to look only at the cash book entries of the days on which he paid visits to vesco s office  to which he used to go with previous intimation. besides that  c  s  raju s management of andhra cements had landed it into a loss of rs. 30  000. because of all these things he had c  s  raju replaced towards the end of the year 1951 by one subbaramayya  a retired finance officer from the madras electricity board both as a director of andhra cements and as a supervisor over the accounts of vesco. subbaramayya took his work seriously and called for information on a number of points from the respondent no  1. he  however  was unable to obtain any information. in january  1952 he therefore brought one s  g  krishna aiyar who had vast experience in the maintenance of accounts of electrical undertaking s having been chief accountant of the south madras electric supply corporation  to undertake an investigation and then to act as financial adviser. in the meantime on november 29  1951 there was a meeting of the general body at which the accounts were  among other things  to be considered. there was a considerable uproar at that meeting because the respondent no  1 said that the auditor s report had not been received. the shareholders felt that the report had been received but was being suppressed or deliberately withheld. however  the meeting was postponed and eventually held on december 9  1951. on that date the respondent no  1 produced the auditor s report. that was also the feeling of a number of shareholders who wanted to see the original but one dutt who was chairman of the meeting after seeing ex. p  234 said that the report seemed to be a genuine one. s  g  krishna aiyar after his appointment in january  1952  made close enquiry and submitted an interim report. that report showed that during the period 1948 49 rs  33  271 10 0 shown as paid to the andhra power system were in fact not paid. the respondent no  1 on being asked to explain said that he would give his explanation to the managing director. the interim report showed that there was a shortage of about rs. 90  000   for this period. on february 12  1952 the respondent no. i wrote to the managing director admitting his responsibility and agreed to make good the amounts found short or such other amounts as would be found short up to the end of march  1952. further scrutiny of the accounts was being carried out by krishna aiyar and in his subsequent report he pointed out that rs  2  38  000   which were shown as having been paid to the andhra power system had actually not been paid. in fact in april  1952 the collector attached vesco properties for realising this amount. on april 30  1952 the respondent no  1  by selling some of his property  himself paid rs  50  000   to the andhra power system towards the sum due to it from vesco and had promised to pay the balance shortly thereafter. he was given time for doing so but he failed to pay it. the directors of vesco thereafter authorised k  s  dutt  one of the directors to lodge a complaint with the police which he accordingly lodged on may 19  1952. on the next day the police placed an armed guard around the office of the respondent no. i and seized a number of papers. as a result of investigation they found that there was a total misappropriation of rs. 3  40  000. on may 13  1954 a chargesheet was filed against the two respondents as well as murti and the approver ramana. od september 13  1954 ramana offered to make a full confession to the additional district magistrate  independent  who was empowered to grant pardon under s  337 of i he code of criminal procedure. he  however  directed ramana to make his confession before a submagistrate. the latter accordingly made a confession on november 15  1954 and on november 17  1954 the additional district magistrate  independent  granted him pardon and that is how he came to be examined as a witness in this case. as already stated  the additional sessions judge convicted both the respondents  the respondent no. i in respect of each head of the offences with which he was charged and the respondent no  2 in respect only of the offences of conspiracy and misappropriation.
[Ratio of the decision] the respondent no  1. ganeswara rao was also an old employee of aeco  having been appointed a stenotypist in the year 1923 on an initial salary of rs. p m. eventually he became the head clerk therein. he pressed his claim for appointment as secretary of vesco and representative of the managing agents at visakhapatnam and r  h g. raju appointed him to that post. all this is not disputed. the respondent no  1  even after his appointment on two posts connected with vesco  continued to work with the aeco also whose business had by then been confined only to that of managing agents of the four companies floated by d l n  raju. we shall deal with mr  bhimasankaram s contentions in the order in which we have set them out. the first question for consideration is whether there was a misjoinder of parties and of persons. the first charge is in respect of the conspiracy alleged to have been entered into by the two respondents  k  v  ramana  the approver  and others  known and unknown  to commit criminal breach of trust of the funds of vesco and  in order to screen its detection  to falsify the accounts of vesco and to use forged documents as genuine. on the face of it this is a valid charge. but certain objections have been taken to it with which we will deal at the appropriate place. the second charge is for an offence of criminal breach of trust punishable under s  409 and the accusation therein is that the two respondents along with ramana  misappropriated 69 items aggregating to a little over rs. 3  20  000. it is clear from the charge that some of the amounts were misappropriated between april  1947 and march  1950  some between april  1947 and march  1949  some between april  1947 and march  1951 and quite a large number between september  1947 and march  1950 and a still large number between april  1951 and march  1952. it is thus apparent that offences committed within a space of 12 months were tried along with offences committed beyond that period. unless  therefore  the provisions of s  239 are applicable it would follow that there was a misjoinder of charges. the third charge is that the two respondents  along with the approver. ramana made false entries on seven different dates in the account books between september 19  1947 and march 18  1952 and thus committed an offence under s  477 a  i p c. the fourth charge is that the two respondents  along with the approver. ramana forged six documents on different dates between march 28  1949 and november 12  1951 and thus committed an offence under s  471 read with s  467  i p c. as we have pointed out earlier the respondent no. i alone was convicted by the additional sessions judge in respect of the third and fourth charges. mr  bhimasankaram supports the reason given by the high court for coming to the conclusion that there was a misjoinder of charges. the main reasons upon which the conclusion of the high court is based are firstly that there could be no clubbing together of the provisions of the various clauses of s  239 and secondly that the respondents were charged with more than three offences of the same kind and that this was in contravention of s  239  c. p c. thus  this is a special provision available in case of doubt and is neither subject to the limitations prescribed by s  233 nor those of the other preceding provisions. now  if the respondent no  1 were alone tried upon the second  third and the fourth charges the provisions of s  235 1  could have been pressed in aid if the allegations were that the offences were so connected together as to form one and the same transaction and the validity of the trial would not have been open to any attack. similarly if the second respondent were alone tried on the second charge his trial would not have been open to any objection if the allegation were that the offences were so connected together as to form the same transaction. here  however  we have a case where the prosecution alleges that there was additionally a conspiracy to which apart from the two respondents the approver and some other persons were parties and where in both the respondents were tried together. a conspiracy must be regarded as one transaction and  there  fore  a single individual charged with it could be tried with the aid of s  235 1  for all the acts committed by him in furtherance or in pursuance of the conspiracy without the limitations imposed by s 234 1. for  where all the acts are referable to the same conspiracy their connection with one another is obvious. the only provision in the code which permits the joint trial of more than one person is s  239 and what we have to see is whether under that provision the two respondents could have been jointly tried for the offences with which they were charged. let us  therefore  examine closely the provisions of s  239. therefore  even if the expression   same transaction  alone had been used in s  235 1  it would have meant a transaction consisting either of a single act or of a series of connec  ted acts. the expression  same transaction  occurring in cls. a    c  and  d  of s  239 as well as that occurring in s  235 1  ought to be given the same meaning according to the normal rule of construction of statutes. looking at the matter in that way  it is pointless to inquire further whether the provisions of s  239 are subject to those of s  236 1. the provisions of sub s. 2  and  3  of s  235 are enabling provisions and quite plainly can have no overriding effect. but it would be open to the court to resort to those provisions even in the case of a joint trial of several persons permissible under s. 239 s  236. is also an enabling provision to be availed of in case of doubt and it is meaningless to say that s  239 is subject to s  236. bearing in mind the fact that the provisions in the  former part  of chapter xix are applicable to charges made with the aid of s  239 only  so far as may be  it would not be right to construe s  239 as being subject to the provisions of ss. 233 to 236. it was contended by mr  chari that the expression  former part  would apply to the first sub  division of chapter xix which deals with the form and content of the charges and the powers of the court with regard to the absence of charge and alteration of charge. we cannot  however  give the expression such a restricted meaning. for  even in the absence of those words  the earlier provisions could not have been ignored. for  it is a rule of construction that all the provisions of a statute are to be read together and given effect to and that it is  therefore  the duty of the court to construe a statute harmoniously. thus  while it is clear that the sections preceding s  239 have no overriding effect on that section    the courts are not to ignore them but apply such of them as can be applied without detracting from the provisions of s 239. indeed  the very expression  so far as may be  empha  sises the fact that while the earlier provisions have to be borne in mind by the court while applying s  239 it is not those provisions but the latter which is to have an overriding effect. apart from this  the question whether the provisions of ss. 233 to 236 have or have no overriding effect on s  239. is not strictly germane to the question considered by the high court that is  clubbing together all the provisions of the various clauses of s  239. whether they can or cannot be read cumulatively must be determined by consideration of the language used in those clauses. we have already indicated how those clauses may be grammatically read. on a plain construction of the provisions of s  239  therefore  it is open to the court to avail itself cumulatively of the provisions of the different clauses of s  239 for the purpose of framing charges and charges so framed by it will not be in violation of the law  the provisions of ss. 233  234 and 235 notwithstanding. the decision of the allahabad high court in t  r  mukherji s case  il   is directly in point and is clearly to the effect that the different clauses of s  239 are mutually exclusive in the sense that it is not possible to combine the provisions of two or more clauses in any one case and to try jointly several persons partly by applying the provisions of one clause and partly by applying those of another or other clauses. a large number of decisions of the different high courts and one of the privy council have been considered in this case. no doubt  as has been rightly pointed out in this case  separate trial is the normal rule and joint trial is an exception. but while this principle is easy to appreciate and follow where one person alone is the accused and the interaction or intervention of the acts of more persons than one does not come in  it would  where the same act is committed by several persons  be not only inconvenient but injudicious to try all the several persons separately. this would lead to unnecessary multiplicity of trials involving avoidable inconvenience to the witnesses and avoidable expenditure of public time and money. no corresponding advantage can be gained by the accused persons by following the procedure of separate trials. where  however  several offences are alleged to have been committed by several accused persons it may be more reasonable to follow the normal rule of separate trials. but here  again  if those offences are alleged not to be wholly unconnected but as forming part of the same transaction the only consideration that will justify separate trials would be the embarrassment or difficulty caused to the accused persons in defending themselves. we entirely agree with the high court that joint trial should be founded on some  principle. but we find it difficult to appreciate what seems to be the view of the high court that because each  clause of s  239 enunciates a separate principle those principles are  so to speak  mutually  exclusive and cannot be cumulatively resorted to for trying several persons jointly in respect of several offences even though they form part of the same transaction. the high court has propounded that the connection described in each of the various clauses is mutually exclusive  that no two of them can exist simulta  neously in any case and that one cannot  therefore  have in any case persons connected with one another in two or more ways. in other words  as the high court puts it  persons included in two or more of the groups cannot all be tried together and that since there is absolutely nothing to connect one group with any other  the persons of one group cannot be tried with those of any other. cl. now  if persons a  b and c are tried for an offence of murder what intrinsic difficulty would there be in trying x  y and z of abetment of the same offence. the transaction in which all of them have participated is the same and the abetment by x  y and z of the offence committed by a  b and c would itself establish the connection of their acts with those of x  y and z. next  let us take cls. a  and  c. c  provides that persons accused of more than one offence of the same kind within the meaning of s  234 committed by them jointly within the period of twelve months could also be charged and tried together. let us consider these clauses along with another illustration. two persons a and b enter a house at night and first together commit the murder of a man sleeping there and then also his wife. each of them has committed two offences and each of them participated in the same offence. why can they not be tried jointly for both murders and why should there be two trials for the two murders. the offences are of the same kind and must be deemed to have been committed in the course of the same transaction because of association and mutual connection. now  supposing in the illustration given a killed the man and b killed his wife. under cl. c  they could be tried together because the offences are of the same kind. it would be ridiculous to say that they cannot be tried together for jointly committing the murder of the man and the wife because cl. a  and  c  cannot be combined. for  without combining these two clauses their joint trial for the two offences in each of which both have participated would be impermissible. then take s   a  and  d. d  persons accused of different offences committed in the course of the same transaction can be tried together. let us suppose that a group of persons are accused of having been members of an unlawful assembly the common object of which was to overawe by sheer force another group of persons and take forcible possession of a piece of land. some of the members of the unlawful assembly carried axes with them while some others carried lathis and attacked the other group. during the course of the attack one person from the second group was killed  as a rest of blows with an axe inflicted by the aggressors a  b and c  two persons of the second group sustained grievous hurt as a result of lathi blows and one person sustained simple hurt. let us say that the grievous hurt was caused as a result of lathi blows given by x and y  simple hurt was caused by lathi blows given by z. here  the offences committed were those under ss. 147  302  325 and 323  i p c. the offences being different and the persons commiting the offences being different  they could not be tried jointly only with the help of cl. a  of s  239. nor again  could they be tried jointly only with the help of cl. d. yet the transaction in which the offences were committed is the same and there is a close association amongst the persons who have committed the different offences. what intrinsic difficulty is there in trying them all together simultaneously availing of cls. a  and  d  of s  239. these are enabling provisions which circumstance implies that the court may avail itself of one or more of these provisions unless doing so would amount to an infringement of any of the provisions of the code. all these persons can be jointly tried for offences under s  147 by recourse to cl. a. so also a  b and c could be jointly tried together for an offences under s  302. x and y can be charged not only with offences under ss. 147 and 325  i  p c  but also under s. 302 read with s  149. similarly z can be charged with offence s under ss. 147  323 and offences under s  302. read with s  149 and s  325. read with s  149. the same offence committed by all of them is that under s  147 and all of them can be tried jointly in respect of that offence under cl. similarly  if we take cl. d  by itself all of them can be tried jointly for the different offences committed by each of them in the course of the same transaction and if cl. a  is unavailable they could not be tried for the offence under s  147 at the same trial. this means that the trial for an offence under s  147 will have to be separated from the trial for the different offences committed by them. it is difficult to appreciate what purpose would be served by separating the trial for the same offence from the trial for different offences. to repeat  the object of the legislature in enacting s  239  cr. p c  clearly was to prevent multiplicity of trials and not only would that object be defeated but an extraordinary result will ensue if the various clauses of s  239 are read disjunctively. the reasons given by the allahabad high court  therefore  do not merit acceptance. the decision in singarachariar s case 1934 indlaw mad 352. c    has really no bearing upon the point before us. what was held there was that ss. 235  1  and s  236 are mutually exclusive and if a case is covered by one of them it cannot be covered by the other. in that case the question was whether a person who was first tried for an offence under s  380  i p c  for stealing a blank second class railway ticket from the booking office  tried  for it and acquitted  could not be tried subsequently for the offence of forgery by making entries in that ticket and using it. the acquittal in the previous case was urged as a bar under s  403 1  of the code to the trial for an offence under s  467  i p c. the contention apparently was that this was a case which fell under s  236  cr. p c  and that if he had been tried alternatively for both the offences at the same trial the court could have dealt with him under s  237  cr. the high court  however  held that to be a kind of case which fell under s  235 1  of the code and that since that was so  the provisions of s  236 were excluded. it is difficult to appreciate how this case assists the conclusion arrived at by the high court. in d k  chandra s case 1951 indlaw mum 117  f  b  it was held that the provisions of ss. 234  235 and 236. being exceptions to s  233 must be strictly construed and that if joinder of charges did not fall under any of them it would be illegal and contrary to law. the precise point which we have to consider here did not fall for consideration in that case i e   whether the provisions of the various clauses of s  239 could be used together or not. this decision is  therefore  of little assistance. on the other band there is the decision of this court in the state of andhra pradesh v  kandinmlla subbaiah   which is to the effect that where several persons had committed offences in the course of the same transactions  they could jointly be tried in respect of all those offences under s  239 of the code of criminal procedure and the limitation placed by s  234 of the code could not come into operation. there  nine persons were jointly tried for  an offence under s  5  1   c  and  d  of the prevention of corruption act  1947  and s  109  i  p  c  read with s  420  s  466 and s  467  i  p  c  and all except one for offences under ss. 420  467 471  i p c. some of them were also charged with separate offences under some of these provisions. two of the accused persons preferred a revision application before the high court of andhra pradesh in which they challenged the charges framed against them. the high court allowed the revision application. but on appeal by the state of andhra pradesh to this court  this court held that there was no misjoinder of charges  that the introduction of a large number of charges  spread over a long period was a question of propriety and that it should be left to the judge or the magistrate trying the case to adopt the course which he thought to be appropriate in the facts and circumstances of the case. in so far as some of the charges were concerned this court pointed out that the special judge who was to try the case should consider splitting them up so that the accused persons would not be prejudiced in answering the charges and defending themselves. it is true that the question of reading the various clauses cumulatively did not specifically arise for decision in that case but the high court had held that the first charge was an omnibus charge containing as many as 203 offences and that it was in direct violation of ss. 234  235 and 239 of the code of criminal procedure. this decision is sufficient to dispose of the point under consideration. no doubt  there is no discussion there as to the question whether the various clauses of s  239 could be combined or as to the impact of the provisions of s  233 to 236 on those of s  239. the actual decision of the case is  however  directly opposed to the contention now put forward before us. this decision has been followed in natwarlal sakarlal. mody v  the state of bombay. crl  a. no  iii of 1959 decided on january 19  1961. in that case the impact of s  120 b  i p c  on ss. 233 and 239 of the code of criminal procedure was considered by this court and this court observed. criminal conspiracy as defined in s  120 a and consists of an agreement to do an illegal act or an agreement to do an act which is not illegal by illegal means. s  120 b provides that whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable with death  imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards shall be punishable in the same manner as if he has abetted such offence unless there was an express provision in the code for the punishment of such conspiracy. criminal conspiracy was  however  not an unknown thing before the amendment of the indian penal code in 1913. but what the amendment did was to make that conspiracy itself punishable. the idea was to prevent the commission of crimes by  so to   speak  nipping them in the bud. but it does not follow that where crimes have been committed the liability to punishment already incurred under s  120 b by having entered into a criminal conspiracy is thereby wiped away. no doubt  as already stated  where offences for committing which a conspiracy was entered into have actually been committed it may not  in the particular circumstances of a case  be desirable to charge the offender both with the conspiracy and the offences committed in pursuance of that conspiracy. but that would be a matter ultimately within the discretion of the court before which the trial takes place. in so far as the fourth point is concerned  that would have a bearing not on the form of the charge but on the credibility of the evidence bearing on the point of conspiracy. as we are remanding the appeal to the high court for a fresh decision after full consideration of the evidence adduced in the case it would be open to it to consider this matter particularly while judging the credibility of the evidence of the approver. in so far as the portion included in the bracket is concerned we agree with the learned counsel that it should not have found place there. the ideas  however  of the committing magistrate in stating all that is said there appears to have been merely to describe the conspiracy and do nothing more. we do not think that either that or the other objection raised  that is  that the charge embraces within it all the offences said to have been committed by the respondents can properly. be said to vitiate the charge. the object in saying what has been set out in the first charge was only to give notice to the respondents as to the ambit of the conspiracy to which they will have to answer and nothing more. even assuming for a moment that this charge is cumbersome in the absence of any objection by the respondents at the proper time and in the absence of any material from which we could infer prejudice  they are precluded by the provisions of s  225 from complaining about it at any rate after their conviction by the trial court. coming to the next point of mr. bhimsankaram regarding the abuse of powers under s  342 his first contention was that long and involved questions were put to the respondents. in fact written statements have been filed by each of them in which every point left over has been fully answered. we are informed that the questions had been prepared before hand by the learned additional sessions judge  copies thereof were made available to each of the respondents and it was with reference to those copies that they gave their answers in the court. a pointed reference was made to question. no  20 put to respondent. no. i which contains as many as 22 sub heads and it is said that it was an extremely unfair and embarrassing question. what the learned additional sessions judge has done is to err on the side of over cautiousness by putting every circumstance appearing in the evidence to the respondents for eliciting their explanations. his object was to obviate the possibility of a complaint before the appellate court that they were denied the opportunity of explaining the circumstances appearing in evidence against them because of defective questions. nor again  do we think that there is any substance in the complaint made that the respondents had no opportunity of referring to the documents to which reference has been made in certain questions. no objection was taken on their behalf before the learned additional sessions judge and from the manner in which they have answered the questions there is no doubt that they must have had opportunity to look at the relevant documents and answer the questions. we are also satisfied that there is no substance in the complaint that the questioning bordered on cross examination. undoubtedly the learned additional sessions judge has questioned the respondents very fully and elaborately but to say that this bordered on cross  examination is wholly unjustifiable. the object of the learned additional sessions judge quite clearly was  as already stated  to leave no loophole for a complaint to be made before the appellate court of incomplete or insufficient examination under s  342 finally we are clear that it was not the duty of the court to draw the pointed attention of the respondents to the provisions of sub s. 4  of s  342 and tell them that they may  if they chose  enter the witness box. it is true that by introducing this provision the disability placed on an accused person in respect of giving evidence on oath in his own defence has been removed and to that extent such person is placed on par with an accused person under the english law. the new provision  however  does no more than lift the ban and does not impose a duty on the court to draw the attention of an accused person to its contents. apart from that  the respondents were represented by counsel at the trial who knew very well what the law was. no complaint was made by the respondents even in appeal that they were ignorant of their right  that had they known about it they would have given evidence on oath in their defence and that because of this they have been prejudiced. in the circumstances this point must also be rejected as being without substance. the irrelevant evidence to which mr  bhimasankaram referred was certain account books. the entries in the  account books of vesco show that certain sums of money were paid to various parties  crompton engineering co   lumin electric co   d  brothers  radio and electrical  madras  vizagapatam municipality  p  v  ramanayya bros   and andhra power system. they also show payment case was that the payments which were entered in the account of vesco do not find a place in the account books of the corresponding firms or authorities because they were never made by vesco. the high court has pointed out that the main evidence on which the prosecution rests its case that the amount represented by the entries against these various firms were in. fact misappropriated by the  respondents in the circumstance that there are no corresponding entries in the account books of those firms. the argument before the high court was and before us is that  the absence of an entry cannot of electricity duty to government. the prosecution be established by reference to s  34 of the indian evidence act which reads thus. what it does is to make entries in books of account regularly kept in the course of business relevant in all proceedings in a court of law. these entries are  however  not by themselves sufficient to charge any person with liability. therefore  when a sues b for a sum of money it is open to him to put his account books  in evidence provided they are regularly kept in the course of business and show by reference to them that the amount claimed by him is debited against b. the entry though made by a in his own account books  and though it is in his own favour is a piece of evidence which the court may take into consideration for the purpose of determining whether the amount referred to therein was in fact paid by a to b. the entry by itself is of no help to a in his claim against b but it can be considered by the court along with the evidence of a for drawing the conclusion that the amount was paid by a to b. to this limited extent entries  in the account books are relevant and can be proved. s  34 does not go beyond that. it says nothing about non existence of entries in account books. we  therefore  agree with the high court that the account books of the various concerns to whom payments are said to have been made by the respondents are not by themselves evidence of the fact that no payments were received by them. the decision in queen empress v  grees chunder banerjee   1884  i  l  r  10. cal 1024    upon which reliance is placed by the high court in support of its view is also to that effect. similarly in ram prashad singh v  lakhpati koer   1902  i  l  r  30. cal 231  247. lord robertson during the course of the hearing has observed that no inference can be drawn from the absence of any entry relating to any particular matter which observation supports the view taken in queen empress v  girish chander banerjee    1884  i l r  10 c l 1024. that   however  is not the only provision to be considered. there is s  ii of the evidence act which provides that facts not otherwise relevant are relevant if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact. some of the facts in issue in this case are whether payments of certain sums of money were made to crompton engineering co   and other firms or authorities. these are relevant facts. absence of entries in their account books would be inconsistent with the receipt of the accounts and would thus be a relevant fact which can be proved under s  11. the fact that no payments were received by those firms has been deposed to by persons connected with those firms and whose duty it was to receive and acknowledge amounts received by the firms or who were in charge of the accounts of these firms. for the purpose of showing that no amounts were received by the firms  their account books would thus be as relevant as the vesco account books for the purpose of showing the contrary. no objection  however  was taken in the courts below on this score and in the absence of any prejudice to the respondents. we do not think that we should take notice of the complaint made by mr  bhimasankaram. the third point stressed by him was that the approver was allowed to refresh his memory  while deposing in the case  by referring extensively to the account books and various documents produced in the case. this  according to him  was an absue of the provisions of s  159 of the evidence act. now  s  159 expressly enables a witness while under examination to refresh his memory by referring to any writing made by himself at the time of the transaction concerning which he is being questioned or soon afterwards  or to a writing made  similarly by another person and read by the witness immediately or soon after the writing was made. s  160 provides that a witness may also testify to the facts mentioned in any such document as is mentioned in s  159. the complaint of mr  bhimasankaram is that the approver should have been questioned about the various facts which were sought to be established through his evidence and it was only if and when he was in a difficulty that he should have been allowed to refer to the account books. instead of doing that what he was permitted to do was just to prove the various documents or read those documents and then depose with reference to them. in our opinion  where a witness has to depose to a large number of transactions   and those transactions referred to are or mentioned either in the account books or in other documents there is nothing wrong in allowing the witness to refer to the account books and the documents while answering the questions put to him in his examination. he cannot be expected to remember every transaction in all its details and s  160 specifically permits a witness to testify the facts mentioned in the documents referred to in s  159 although he has no recollection of the facts themselves if he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document. that is precisely what happened in this case and we do not think that the additional sessions judge adopted a procedure which was either a violation of law or was an abuse of the power of the court. the next point is a formidable one. according to mr  bhimasankaram  the pardon tendered to the approver was illegal and if the pardon is illegal his evidence is wholly inadmissible. further  according to him  the evidence of the approver was found by the additional sessions judge to be unreliable and therefore  the first condition referred to in sarwan singh v  the state of punjab   was not satisfied. for all these reasons the evidence of the approver must be left out of account. if it is left out of account  he contends  there is nothing left in the prose  cution case  because  as pointed out by the additional sessions judge himself the evidence of the approver is the pivot of the prosecution case. the pardon is stated to be illegal for two reasons. the first reason is that none of the offences alleged to have been committed falls within s  337 of the code of criminal procedure and the second reason is that the pardon was granted by an authority not empowered to grant it. s  337  1  as it stood before its amendment by act 26 of 1955 read thus. no doubt  if this interpretation is accepted the object of the section  that is  to embrace within it the graver offences  would be fulfilled  but we wish to express no opinion on it. for  the pardon granted in  this case can be regarded as being within the ambit of s  337  1  for another reason. it will be noticed that transportation for life was not the only punishment provided for an offence under s  409 of the indian penal code even before the amendment made to the indian penal code by s  117 of the act 26 of 1955  the other alternative being imprisonment up to 10 years. therefore  since the offence under s  409 was not merely punishable with transportation for life but alternately also punishable with imprisonment which could extend to 10 years  s  337  1  would apply. this section does not expressly say that the only punishment provided for the offence should be imprisonment not exceeding 10 years. the reason why two alternative maximum sentences are given in col. 7  that is  transportation for life  now imprisonment for life  and imprisonment not exceeding 10 years appears to be that the offence is not exclusively triable by a court of session and could also be tried by a magistrate  who  except when empowered under s  30 would be incompetent to try offences punishable with transportation for life  now imprisonment for life  and the further reason that it should be open to the court of session  instead of awarding the sentence of transportation for life to a convicted person to award him imprisonment in a jail in india itself for a period not execeeding 10 years. now  of course  by the amendment made by s  117 of act 26 of 1955 for the words  transportation for life  the words  imprisonment for life  have been substituted  but the original structure of all the sections now amended continues. that is why they read rather queer but even so they serve the purpose of allowing certain offences triable by a court of session  to be triable also by magistrates of the first class. be that as it may  there is no substance in the first ground. what we have said about pardon in respect of an offence under s  409 would apply equally to that for one under s  120 b because the punishment for it is the same as that for the offence under s  409. the offence under s  467 read with s  471 is punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either description for a period of 10 years but it is exclusively triable by a court of session and  therefore  in so far as such offence is concerned the argument of mr  bhimasankaram would not even have been available. as regards the offence under s  477 a  it is one of those sections which are specifically enumerated in s  337  1  and the argument advanced before us and which we have rejected would not even be available with regard to the pardon in respect of that offence. it is true that the respondent no. i alone was convicted by the additional sessions judge of this offence and the offence under s  467 read with s  471 but the validity of a pardon is to be determined with reference to the offence alleged against the approver alone and not with reference to the offence or offences for which his associates were ultimately convicted. mr  bhimasankaram s argument on the point may be summarised thus   such a power cannot be conferred upon an additional district magistrate because s  337  1  does not contemplate grant of pardon by an additional district magistrate and that the additional district magistrate would have no status other than that of a magistrate  first class. no doubt  under entry  9 a  in part iii of sch. iii to the code a magistrate  first class  has the power to grant pardon under s  337 but it is limited by the proviso thereto to certain classes of cases. a case under enquiry or trial before another magistrate does not fall in any of these classes. therefore  a pardon granted by him in such a case would be illegal. the magistrate before whom the enquiry or trial is proceeding or the district magistrate would be the only authorities competent to grant a pardon in such a case. alternatively  the state government has not made any directions under sub s. 2  of s  10 specifying the powers of the district magistrate which would lie exercisable by the additional district magistrate concerned. in order to appreciate and consider the argument it is desirable to bear in mind the changes in the magisterial set up in the former province of madras which comprised within it the district of visakhapatnam. by government order no  3106 dated september 9  1949 the government of the province of madras issued certain instructions to the magistrates in pursuance of the separation of the judiciary from the executive. it divided the magistrates into two groups  judicial magistrates and executive magistrates. the latter category comprises of the executive officers of the revenue department  on whom the responsibility for the maintenance of law and order was to continue to rest. para 4 of the instructions provides. para 5 provides that as officers of the revenue department  those magistrates would be under the control of the government through the board of revenue. the additional district magistrates  independent  would also be under the control of the government through the board of revenue. the category of judicial magistrates was constituted of the following   1  district magistrate   2  sub divisional magistrates   3  additional first class magistrates and  4  second class magistrates  sub  magistrates. the district magistrate was constituted as the principal magistrate of the district and as such was entrusted with the duty of general administration and superintendence and control over the other judicial magis  trates in the district. in addition to his general supervisory functions and the special powers under the code of hearing revision petitions  transfer petitions  appeals from second class magistrates and the like  the district magistrate was also to be assigned a specific area  the cases arising from which would be disposed of normally by himself. this body of magistrates was made subordinate to the high court. till the separation between the judiciary and the executive was effected the collector as the head of the revenue department was also the district magistrate. consequent on the separation. he became only an additional district magistrate. part iv of the government order deals with the allocation of powers between the judicial and executive magistrates. para 19 3  occurring in this part deals with allocation of powers under the provisions of the code otherwise than these referred to in the earlier paragraphs. it specifically provides that the power to tender pardon udder s  337 shall be exercised by executive magistrates except in cases referred to in the proviso to sub s. 1  of that section  in which case a judicial magistrate may exercise that power. in spite of the government order all magistrates who have  under sch. iii to the code of criminal procedure the power to grant pardon will continue to have that power and  therefore  a pardon granted by a judicial magistrate in contravention of the government order will not be rendered invalid. however  that is not the point which is relevant while considering the argument of mr  bhimasankaram. his point is that the proviso to s  337 1  confers the power on  the district magistrate  to grant pardon in a case pending before another magistrate and not on  a district magistrate  and  therefore  his power to grant pardon in such cases cannot be conferred under sub s  2  of s  10 on an additional district magistrate. according to him  under that section only the powers of  a district magistrate  meaning thereby only the powers under entry 7  a  in part v of sch. iii. as distinguished from the power under the proviso to s  337  1  can be conferred upon an additional district magistrate. secondly  according to him  no direction has in fact been shown to have been made by the state government conferring upon an additional district magistrate the power of the district magistrate to grant pardon. in our opinion  there is no subtance in the contention. the power conferred by sub s. 1  of s  337 on the different clauses of magistrates is of the same character. the power to grant pardon in a case pending before another magistrate is no doubt conferred by the proviso only on the district magistrate. but entry 7  a  in part v of sch. iii when it refers to the power of a district magistrate under s  337  1  does not exclude the power under the proviso. there is  therefore  no warrant for drawing a distinction between the powers of  the district magistrate  and the powers of   a district magistrate. the power of a district magistrate to grant pardon has been specifically conferred on additional district magistrates as would appear from s. no. 37 of sch. iii of the government order  which reads thus. the question raised is an important one and requires a serious consideration. mr  chari in support of his contention has cited a large number of cases  indian as well as english  and certain passages from halsbury s laws of england. but in the view we take about the legal validity of the pardon tendered  we do not wish to pronounce one way or the other on this very interesting question. now  as regards the reliability of the approver. it is no doubt true that an approver has always been regarded as an infamous witness  who  on his own showing has participated in a crime or crimes and later to save his own skin  turned against his former associates and agreed to give evidence against them in the hope that he will be pardoned for the offence committed by him. the high court seems to think that before reliance could be placed upon the evidence of the approver it must appear that he is a penitent witness. that  in our opinion  is not the correct legal position. the section itself shows that the motivating factor for an approver to turn  what in england is called  king s evidence  is the hope of pardon and not any noble sentiment like contrition at the evil in which he has participated. whether the evidence of the approver should in any given case be accepted or not will have to be determined by applying the usual tests such as the probability of the truth of what he has deposed to the circumstances in which he has come to give evidence whether he has made a full and complete disclosure  whether his evidence is merely self exculpatory and so on and so forth. the court has  in addition  to ascertain whether his evidence has been corroborated sufficiently in material particulars. what is necessary to consider is whether applying all these tests we should act upon the evidence of the approver should be acted upon. we however  find that certain documents upon which mr  chari wants to rely are not included in the paper book. it would take considerable time if we were to adjourn this matter now and give an opportunity to the parties to include those documents on record. the better course would be for us to set aside the acquittal of the respondents and send back the appeal to the high court  or being decided on merits. the high court will of course be bound by the finding which we have given on the questions of law agitated before us. what it must now do is to consider the entire evidence and decide for itself whether it is sufficient to bring home all or any of the offences to the respondents. we may mention that the high court s observation that the approver s evidence was treated as unreliable by the learned additional sessions judge is not correct. of course  the view taken by the additional sessions judge is not binding on the high court. but it should remove from its mind the misconception that the additional sessions judge has not believed him. there is another thing which we would like to make clear. the decision in sarwan singh v  the state of punjab   1957  b  c  r  953    on which reliance has been placed by the high court has been explained by this court in the case of maj. e  g  barsay v  the state of bombay. this court has pointed out in the latter decision that while it must be shown that the approver is a witness of truth  the evidence adduced in a case cannot be considered in compartments and that even for judging the credibility of  the approver the evidence led to corroborate him in material particulars would be relevant for consideration. the high court should bear this in mind for deciding whether the evidence of the approver should be acted upon or not. then again it would not be sufficient for the high court to deal with the evidence in a general way. it would be necessary for it to consider for itself the evidence adduced by the prosecution on the specific charges and then to conclude whether those charges have been established or not. the prosecution would be well  advised if  instead of placing the evidence on each and every one of those large number of charges against the respondents  it chooses to select a few charges under each head other than the head of conspiracy and concentrates on establishing those charges  this would save public time and also serve the purpose of the prosecution. with these observations we set aside the acquittal of the respondents and remit the appeal to the high court for decision on merits in the light of our observations.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. signifies income proximately derived from direct association with land by a. person who actually tills the land or 877 gets it cultivated by others. appeal from the judgment and order dated the 28th day of march  1952  of the. arising out of the order dated the 23rd day of april  1951  of the income tax. appellate tribunal in income tax appeal no  5228 of 1950 51. 112 878 jamshedji kanga   r  j  kolah  m  m  jhaveri and rajinder narain  with. him  for the appellant. m c  setalvad  attorney general  for india   g  n  joshi  with him  for the. respondent. 1954   october 28  the judgment of the court was delivered by ghulam hasan. j  this appeal raises an interesting point of law under the indian income tax. act. the question referred by the tribunal to the high court of judicature at. bombay was stated thus. whether 60  of the dividend amounting to rs  2 750  received by the assessee. section 4 3   viii  of the act   chagla c j  and tendolkar j   who heard the. reference  answered the question in the negative by two separate but. concurring judgments dated march 28  1952. the facts lie within a narrow compass  the appellant  mrs. bacha f  guzdar  was  in the accounting year 1949 50  a shareholder in two. tea companies  patrakola tea company ltd   and bishnath tea company ltd   and. two companies carried on business of growing and manu  facturing tea  by rule. 21 of the indian income tax rules  1922  made in exercise of the powers. income derived from the sale of tea grown and manufactured by the seller in. appellant  the dividend income received by her in respect of the shares held. by her in the said tea companies is to the extent of 60  agricultural income. in her hands and therefore pro tanto exempt from tax while the revenue. the high court  the high court upheld the order of the tribunal but granted. leave to appeal to this court.
[Ratio of the decision] company is not derived by the shareholder owing to his direct connection with. the land in which be  is grown and such dividend is not agricultural income. within the meaning of s. 2 1  of the act and hence is not exempted from income tax under s  4 3  viii. of the act. the dividend of a shareholder is the outcome of his right to participate in. the profits of the company arising out of the contractual relation between the. company and the shareholder and this right exists independently of any. declaration of the dividend though until such declaration the enjoyment of the. profits is postponed. the shareholder by purchase of the share does not acquire any interst in the. assets  of the company till after the company is wound up  the position of a. shareholder of a company is altogether different from that of a partner of a. firm  a company is a juristic entity distinct from the shareholders but the. firm is a collective name or an alias for all the partners. decisions based on the peculiarities of income tax law of england are hardly. safe guides for determining the true meaning of the term  agricultural income. under the indian income tax act  1922. chiranjit lal chowdhuri v  the union of india  1950  s c r. 869  followed. commissioners of inland revenue v  forrest  1924  8 t c. from the two tea companies is agricultural income and as such exempt under. received from the aforesaid companies dividends aggregating to rs  2 750  the. business and 40  of such income shall be deemed to be income  profits and. gains  liable to tax   it is common ground that 40  of the income of the tea. companies was taxed as income from the manufacture and sale of tea and 60  of. such income was exempt from tax as agricultural income  according to the. whole of the income is liable to tax  the income tax officer and on appeal. the appellate assistant commissioner both concurred in holding the whole of. the said income to be liable to tax. the income tax appellate tribunal confirmed the view that the dividend income. could not be treated as agricultural income in the hands of the shareholder. and decided in favour of the revenue  but  agreed that its order gave rise to. a question of law and formulated the same as set out above and referred it to. the question  we comprehend  is capable of an easy solution and can best be. answered by reference to the material provisions of the income tax act  under. a  any rent or revenue derived from land which is used for agricultural. purposes  and is either assessed to land  revenue in the taxable territories. including in that category clause  v   income from other sources   it is. common ground that dividend falls under this category. in order  however  that dividend may be held to be agricultural income it will. be incumbent upon the appellant to show that  within the terms of the. definition  it is rent or revenue derived from land which is used for. revenue derived from land because 60  of the profits of the company out of. which dividends are payable are referable to the pursuit of agricultural. operations on the part of the company  it is true that the agricultural. process renders 60  of the profits exempt from tax in the hands of the company. from land which is used for agricultural purposes but can it be said that when. such company decides to distribute its profits to the shareholders and. declares the dividends to be allocated to them   such dividends in the hands. of the shareholders also partake of the character of revenue derived from land. which is  used for agricultural purposes   such a position   if accepted would. extend the scope of the vital words i revenue derived from land  beyond its. legitimate limits  agricultural income as defined in the act is obviously. intended to refer to the revenue received by direct association with the land. which is used for agricultural purposes and not by indirectly extending it to. cases where that revenue or part thereof changes hands either by way of. distribution of dividends or otherwise  in fact and truth dividend is derived. from the investment made in the shares of the company and the foundation of it. rests on the contractual relations between the company and the shareholder. dividend is not derived by a shareholder by his direct relationship with the. land  there can be no doubt that the i initial source which has produced the. revenue is land used for agricultural purposes but to give to the words. revenue derived from land the unrestricted meaning  apart from its direct. association or relation with the land  would be quite unwarranted  for. example  the proposition that a creditor advancing money on interest to an. agriculturist 881 and receiving interest out of the produce of the lands in. the hands of the agriculturist can claim exemption of tax upon the ground that. it is agricultural income within the meaning of section 4  sub section  3. viii   is hardly statable  the policy of the act as gathered from the various. those into whosoever hands that revenue falls  however remote the receiver of. such revenue may be  is hardly warranted. anderson in commissioners of inland revenue v. forrest 1   that an investor buys in the first place a share of the assets of. the industrial concern proportionate to the number of shares he has purchased. and also buys the right to participate in any profits which the company may. make in the future  that a shareholder acquires a right to participate in the. profits of the company may be readily conceded but it is not possible to. accept the contention that the shareholder acquires any interest in the assets. of the company  the use of the word  assets  in the passage quoted above. cannot be exploited to warrant the inference that a shareholder  on investing. money in the purchase of shares  becomes entitled to the assets of the company. and has any share in the property of the company  a shareholder has got no. interest in the property of the company though he has undoubtedly a right to. participate in the profits if and when the company decides to divide them  the. interest of a shareholder vis a vis the company was explained in the case of. chiranjitlal chowdhuri v  the union of india and others 1   that judgment. negatives the position taken up on behalf of the appellant that a shareholder. has got a right in the property of the company  it is true that the. shareholders of the company have  1    1924  8 t c  704   cgi. bin lawcite cit  281924 29 208 20tax 20cas 20704  710    2    1950  insc. 38  http   www liiofindia org in cases cen insc 1950 38 html     1950  s c r. 869   cgi bin lawcite cit  5b1950 5d 20scr 20869   904. 882 the  sole determining voice in administering the affairs of the company. shareholders but the interest of the shareholder either individually or. collectively does not amount to more than a right to participate in the. profits of the company  the company is a juristic person and is distinct from. the shareholders  it is the company which owns the property and not the. shareholders  the dividend is a share of the profits declared by the company. as liable to be distributed among the shareholders  reliance is placed on. behalf of the appellant on a passage in buckley s companies act  12th ed. page 894  where the etymological meaning of dividend is given as dividendum. the total divisible sum but in its ordinary sense it means the sum paid and. received as the quotient forming the share of the divisible sum payable to the. recipient  this statement does not justify the contention that shareholders. are owners of a divisible sum or that they are owners of the property of the. company  the proper approach to the solution of the question is to concentrate. on the plain words of the definition of agricultural income which connects in. no uncertain language revenue with the land from which it directly springs and. a stray observation in a case which has no bearing upon the present question. does not advance the solution of the question  there is nothing in the indian. law to warrant the assumption that a shareholder who buys shares buys any. interest in the property of the company which is a juristic person entirely. distinct from the shareholders  the true position of a shareholder is that on. buying shares an investor becomes entitled to participate in the profits of. the company in which he holds the shares if and when the company declares. subject to the articles of association  that the profits or any portion. thereof should be distributed by way of dividends among the shareholders  he. has undoubtedly a further right to participate in the assets of the company. which would be left over after winding up  but not in the assets as a whole as. lord anderson puts it. 883 the high court expressed the view that until a dividend is declared there. is no  right in a shareholder to participate in the profits and according to. them the declaration of dividend by the company is the effective source of the. dividend which is subject to tax  this statement of the law we are unable to. accept  indeed the learned attorney  general conceded that he was not prepared. to subscribe to that proposition  the  declaration of  dividend is certainly. not the source of the profit  the right to participation in the profits exists. independently of any declaration by the company with the only difference that. the enjoyment of profits is postponed until dividends are declared. it was argued that the position of shareholders in a company is analogous to. that of partners inter se    this analogy is wholly inaccurate  partnership is. merely an association of persons for carrying on the business of partnership. and in law the firm name is a compendious method of describing the partners. such is  however  not the case of a company which stands as a separate. juristic entity distinct from the shareholders  in halsbury s laws of england. volume 6  3rd ed    page 234  the law regarding the attributes of shares is. thus stated. a share is a right to a specified amount of the share capital of a company. carrying with it certain rights and liabilities while the company is a going. concern and in its winding up  the shares or other interest of any member in a. company are personal estate transferable in the manner provided by its. articles  and are not of the  nature of real estate    in borland s trustee v. steel brothers   co  ltd  1   farwell j  held that  a share in a company. cannot properly be likened to a sum of money settled upon and subject to. executory limitations to arise in the future   it is rather to be regarded as. the interest of the shareholder in the company  measured  for the purposes of. liability and dividend  by a sum of money                                  it. was suggested that the dividend arises out of the profits accruing from land. and is impressed with the same character as the profits  1   l r   1901  1 ch. 279    cgi bin lawcite cit  5b1901 5d 20lr 201 20ch 20279. 884 and that it does not change its character merely because of the incident. that it reaches the hands of the shareholder. this argument runs counter to  the definition of agricultural income which. emphasizes the necessity of the recipient of income having a direct and an. immediate rather than an indirect and remote relation with land  to accept. this argument will be tantamount to saying that the creditor recovering. interest on money debt due from the agriculturist who pays out of the produce. of the land is equally entitled to the exemption  in fairness to mr  kolah it. must  however  be stated that the contention was not so broadly put but there. is no reason why one should stop at a particular stage and not pursue the. analogy to its logical limits. english decisions resting upon the peculiarities of the english income tax law. can hardly be a safe guide  in determining upon the language of the indian. income tax act the true meaning of the words  agricultural income   a few. cases of the privy council decided with reference to the provisions of the. indian income tax act  however  deserve notice  the first case   viz. employer avail  able for the purpose  and that the remuneration therefore was. not agricultural income and was not exempt from tax. the terms of the income tax act and the authorities referred to is that where. an assessee receives income  not itself of a character to fall within the. definition of agricultural income contained in the  act  such income does not. assume the character of agricultural income by reason of the source from which. it is derived  or the method by which it is calculated    in the third case. viz   maharajkumar gopal saran narain singh v  commissioner of income tax. bihar and orissa 1   an annual payment for life to the assessee was not held. to be agricultural income and therefore not exempt from tax where the annuity. arose out of a transfer made by the assessee of a portion of his estate for. discharging his debts and for obtaining an adequate income for his life it. being held that it was not rent or revenue derived from land   but  money paid. under a contract imposing personal liability on the covenantor the discharge. of which was secured by a charge on  1    1948  16 i t r  380    cgi. bin lawcite cit  5b1948 5d 2016 20itr 20380. 2    1935  3 i t r  237    cgi bin lawcite cit  5b1935 5d 203 20itr 20237. 886 land  but reliance was placed uponanother judgment of the privy council in. the same volume at page 305  in commissioner of income tax  bihar and orissa. v  sir kameshwar singh 1   that was a case of a usufructuary mortgagee the. profits received by whom were exempt from income tax on the ground that they. by whomsoever it may be received   these observations must be held to be. confined to the facts of that particular case which was a case of usufructuary. mortgagee who had received profits directly from the land  the obvious. implication of the words used by lord macmillan was that whosoever receives. profit from the land directly is entitled to the exemption. reference was also made to some english decisions but they have no bearing. upon the present case as they were founded on the english income tax law and. the provisions of the particular statute. portion which is excluded on the ground of agricultural income  we do not. consider it necessary to express any opinion upon this contention as our. conclusion reached as a result of the foregoing discussion is sufficient to.

[Facts] for seven years  was elected a member of madras legislative assembly  at the. instance of the speaker the assembly  the governor of madras referred to the. election commission  which had its offices permanently located at new delhi. court of madras under article 226 of the constitution for a writ restraining. the election commission from enquiring into his alleged disqualification for. membership of the assembly. court of judicature at madras  subba rao j   in writ petition no  599 of 1952. filed under the special original jurisdiction of the high court under article. 226 of the constitution of india. m c  setalvad  attorney general for india  g  n. joshi  with him  for the appellant and intervener. mohan kumaramangalam  for the respondent. 1953   february 27  the judgment of the court was delivered by patanjali. sastri c j   this is an appeal from an order of a single judge of the high. court of judicature at madras issuing a writ of prohibition restraining the. 1146 election commission  a statutory authority constituted by the president. and having its offices permanently located at new delhi  from enquiring into. the alleged disqualification of the respondent for membership of the madras. legislative assembly. the respondent was convicted by the sessions judge of east godavari and. sentenced to a term of seven years  rigorous imprisonment in 1942  and he was. released on the occasion of the celebration of the ludependence day on 15th. august  1947   in june  1952  there was to be a by election to a reserved seat. in the kakinada constituency of the madras legislative assembly  and the. respondent  desiring to offer himself as a candidate but finding himself. disqualified under section 7  b  of the representation of the people act. 1951  as five years had not elapsed from his release  applied to the. commission on 2nd april  1952  for exemp  tion so as to enable him to contest. the election  no reply to the application having been received till 5th may. 1952  the last day for filing nominations  the respondent filed his nomination. on that day  but no exception was taken to it either by the returning officer. or any other candidate at the scrutiny of the nomination papers  the election. was held on 14th june  1952  and the respondent  who secured the largest. number of votes  was declared elected on 16th june  1952   the result of the. election was published in the fort st  george gazette  extraordinary  on 19th. june  1952  and the respondent took his seat as a member of the assembly on. 27th june  1952  meanwhile  the commission rejected the respondent s. application for exemption and communicated such rejection to the respondent by. its letter dated 13th may  1952  which however was not received by him  on 3rd. july  1952  the speaker of the assembly read out to the house a communication. received from the commission bringing to his notice  for such action as he may. think fit to take   the fact that the respondent s application for exemption. had been rejected  a question as to the respondent s disqualification having. thus been raised  the speaker referred the question to the governor of 1147. madras who forwarded the case to the commission for its  opinion  as required. by article 192 of the constitution. the respondent having thereupon challenged the competency of the reference and. the action taken thereon by the governor  the commission notified the. respondent that his case would be heard on 21st august  1952  accordingly  the. chief election commissioner  who wag the sole member of the commission for the. time being  went down to madras and heard the respondent s counsel and the. advocate general of madras on 21th august  1952  when it was agreed that  in. on the same day  21st august  1952  the respondent applied to the high court. under article 226 of the constitution contending that article 192 thereof was. applicable only where a member became subject to a disqualification after he. was elected but not where  as here  the disqualification arose long before the. election  in which case the only remedy was to challenge the validity of the. election before an election tribunal  he accordingly prayed for the issue of a. writ of mandamus or of prohibition directing the commission to forbear from. proceeding with the reference made by the governor of madras who was not. however  made a party to the proceeding  on receipt of the rule nisi issued by. by a single member of the board who reduced the rent as desired by the ryots. the zemindar appealed by way of revision to the collective board which. sanctioned an enhancement  thereupon the ryots applied to the high court for. the issue of a writ of certiorari to bring up and quash the proceedings of the. collective board which passed the order complained of in the town of madras.
[Ratio of the decision] the question whether the respondent was disqualified and could be allowed to. sit and vote in the assembly  the respondent thereupon applied to the high. held  that the power of the high court to issue writs under article 226 of the. constitution is subject to the two  fold limitation 1145 that such writs. cannot run beyond the territories subject to its jurisdiction and the person. or authority to whom the high court is empowered to issue such writs must be. amenable to the jurisdiction of the high court either by residence or location. within the territories subject to its jurisdiction. the high court of madras bad therefore no jurisdiction to issue a writ under. article 226 of the constitution against the election commission. held further  that articles 190 3  and 192 1  are applicable only to. disqualifications to which a member becomes subject after heis elected as. such  and neither the governor nor the election commission had jurisdiction to. enquire into the respondent s disqualification which arose long before his. election. a tribunal or authority permanently located and normally carrying on its. activities outside the territorial limits of a high court cannot be regarded. as functioning within those territorial limits and therefore amenable to the. jurisdiction of that high court  merely because it exercises jurisdiction. within those territorial limits so as to affect the rights of parties therein. the fact that the matter referred to it for decision related to the opposite. party s right to sit and vote in the legislative assembly at madras and the. parties to the dispute resided in the state of madras could not give. jurisdiction to the high court of madras to issue such a writ against the. election commission. an appeal lies to the supreme court under article 132 of the constitution even. from a judgment  decree or final order of a single judge of a high court. provided the requisite certificate is given. civil appellate jurisdiction  civil appeal no  205 of 1952. appeal from the judgment and order dated the 16th september  1952  of the high. reach the commission in delhi by 28th august  1952  and the commission should. take them into consideration before giving its opinion to the governor. the high court  the commission demurred to the jurisdiction of the court to. issue the writs asked for  on the ground that the commission was not  with in. the territory in relation to which the high court exercised jurisdiction   a. further objection to the maintainability of the application was also raised to. the effect that the action of the governor in seeking the opinion of the. commission could not be challenged in view of the immunity provided under. article 361  1   and that the commission itself  which had not to  decide  the. question of disqualification  but had merely to give its 1148  opinion   could. not be proceeded against under article 226. construction  applicable to cases of disqualification arising both before and. after the election and that both the reference of the question as to the. respondent s disqualification to the governor of madras and the latter s. reference of the same to the commission for its opinion were competent and. valid. the application was heard by subba rao j  who overruled the preliminary. objections and held that article 192 on its true construction applied only to. cases of supervening disqualifications and that the commission had  therefore. no jurisdiction to deal with the respondent s disqualification which arose. long before the election took place  he accordingly issued a writ prohibiting. the commission from proceeding with the enquiry in regard to the question. referred to it by the governor under article 192   the learned judge  however. granted a certificate under article 132 that the case involved substantial. questions of law as to the interpretation of the constitution  and the. commission has accordingly preferred this appeal. civil matters are concerned  the more comprehensive provisions in article. 133 1   c  for the grant of a certificate of fitness for appeal to the supreme. ground  namely  a substantial question of law being involved as to the. interpretation of the constitution  and that the court s power  therefore  to. grant a certificate of fitness on any ground including the ground referred to. above  must be deem  ed to arise under article 133 1   c   with the result. that the exercise of such power is excluded by the opening 1149 words of. clause  3  of that article which bars an appeal from the judgment  decree or. final order of one judge of a high court  the argument was sought to be. reinforced by reference to clause  2  of that article and the proviso to. article 145 3  both of which contemplate appeals involving substantial. questions of law as to the interpretation of the constitution being brought. without a certificate having been obtained under article 132  the argument has. no force. while it is true that constitutional questions could be raised in appeals. filed without a certificate under article 132  the terms of that article make. it clear that an appeal is allowed from  any judgment  decree or final order. of a high court  provided  of course  the requisite certificate is given  and. no restriction is placed on the right of appeal having reference to the number. of judges by whom such judgment  decree or final order was passed  had it been. intended to exclude the right of appeal in the case of a judgment etc   by one. judge  it would have been easy to include a reference to article 132 also in. the opening words of article 133 3   as in the immediately preceding clause. if the respondent s contention were accepted  not only would article 132. become redundant so far as it relates to civil proceedings  but the object of. the explanation to that article  which was designed to supersede the decision. of the federal court in s  kuppuswami rao v  the king  1  and thus to secure a. speedy determination of constitutional issues going to the root of a case. would be defeated  as the explanation is not made applicable to the same. expression  final order  used in article 133 1   the whole scheme of the. appellate jurisdiction of the supreme court clearly indicates that questions. relating to the interpretation of the constitution are placed in a special. category irrespec  tive of the nature of the proceedings in which they may. arise  and a right of appeal of the widest amplitude is allowed in cases. involving such questions  we accordingly overrule the preliminary objection. and hold that the appeal is maintainable. 1    1947  f c r  180    cgi bin lawcite cit  5b1947 5d 20fcr 20180. 149 1150 turning now to the question as to the powers of a high court under. article 226  it will be noticed that article 225 continues to the existing. high courts the same jurisdiction and powers as they possessed immediately. before the commencement of the constitution  though there had been some. conflict of judicial opinion on the point it was authoritatively decided by. the privy council in the parlakimedi case 1  that the high court of madras. the high courts of bombay and calcutta were in the same position had no power. to issue what were known as high prerogative writs beyond the local limits of. its original civil jurisdiction  and the power to issue such writs within. those limits was derived by the court as successor of the supreme court which. had been exercising jurisdiction over the presidency town of madras and was. replaced by the high court established in pursuance of the charter act of. 1861  the other  high courts in india had no power to issue such writs at all. in that situation  the makers of the constitution  having decided to provide. for certain basic safeguards for the people in the new set up  which they. called fundamental rights  evidently thought it necessary to provide also a. quick and inexpensive remedy for the enforcement of such rights and  finding. that the prerogative writs which the courts in england had developed and used. whenever urgent necessity demanded immediate and decisive interposition  were. peculiarly suited for the purpose  they conferred  in the states  sphere  new. and wide powers on the high courts of issuing directions  orders  or writs. primarily for the enforcement of fundamental rights  the power to issue such. directions  etc    for any other purpose  being also included with a view. apparently to place all the high courts in this country in somewhat the same. position as the court of king s bench in england  but wide as were the powers. thus conferred  a two fold limitation was placed upon their exercise  in the. first place  the power is to be exercised  throughout the territories in. relation to which it exercises jurisdiction   that is to say  the writs issued. 1  70 i a  129 1151 by the court cannot run beyond the territories subject to. its jurisdiction  secondly  the person or authority to whom the high court is. empowered to issue such writs must be  within those territories   which. clearly implies that they must be amenable to its jurisdiction either by. residence or location within those territories. such limitation is indeed a logical consequence of the origin and development. of the power to issue prerogative writs as a special remedy in england  such. law  vol  1  p  212 et seq   these writs had their origin in the exercise of. the king s prerogative power of superintendence over the due observance of the. law by his officials and tribunals  and were issued by the court of king s. bench habeas corpus  that the king may know whether his subjects were lawfully. imprisoned or not. certiorari  that he may know whether any proceedings commenced against them. are conformable to the law  mandamus  to ensure that his officials did such. acts as they were bound to do under the law  and prohibition  to oblige the. inferior tribunals in his realm to function within the limits of their. respective jurisdiction  see also the introductory remarks in the judgment in. the parlakimedi case 1   these writs were thus specifically directed to the. persons or authorities against whom redress was sought and were made. returnable in the court issuing them and  in case of disobedience  were. enforceable by attachment for contempt  these characteristics of the special. form of remedy rendered it necessary for its effective use that the persons or. authorities to whom the court was asked to issue these writs should be within. the limits of its territorial jurisdiction  we are unable to agree with the. learned judge below that if a tribunal or authority permanently located and. normally carrying on its activities elsewhere exercises jurisdiction within. those territorial  1  70 i a  129  140. 1152 limits so as to affect the rights of parties therein  such tribunal or. authority must be regarded as  function mg  within the territorial limits of. the high court and being therefore amenable to its jurisdiction under article. 226. jurisdiction to issue a writ to the commission at new delhi because the. question referred to it for decision related to the respondent s right to sit. and vote in the legislative assembly at madras and the parties to the dispute. also resided in the state of madras  the position  it was claimed  was. analogous to the court exercising jurisdiction over persons outside the limits. of its jurisdiction  provided the cause of action arose within those limits. reliance was placed upon the following observations of the privy council in. the parlakimedi case 1    the question of jurisdiction must be regarded as one. of substance and that it would not have been within the competence of the. supreme court to claim juisdiction over such a matter as the present of. issuing certiorari to the board of revenue on the strength of its location in. the town  such a view would give jurisdiction to the supreme court in the. matter of the settlement of rents of ryoti holdings in ganges between parties. not otherwise subject to its jurisdiction  which it would not have had over. the revenue officer who dealt with the matter at first instance   we cannot. accede to this argument   the rule that cause of action attracts jurisdiction. parlakimedi situated beyond the local limits of the original civil. jurisdiction of the madras high court  dissatisfied  1  70 i a  129. 1153 with the settlement made by the revenue officer  the ryots appealed to. the board of revenue which had its offices at madras  the appeal was accepted. the privy council considered the question of jurisdiction from two separate. standpoints     a  independently of the local civil jurisdiction which the. high court exercises over the presidency town  or  b solely by reason thereof. as an incident of the location of the board of revenue within the town   on. question  a   they examined the powers of the supreme court at madras to issue. certiorari beyond the presidency town under clause 8 of the charter of 1800. as it was suggested that the high court succeeded to the jurisdiction and. powers of the supreme court which had been granted the same powers of issuing. prerogative writs as the court of king s bench in england throughout the. province  and they recorded their conclusion thus. their lordships are not of opinion that the supreme court would have had any. jurisdiction to correct or control a country court of the company deciding a. dispute between indian inhabitants of ganjam about the rent payable for land. the board of revenue as a body which is ordinarily resident or located within. 1  46 i a  i 76. 1154 the town of madras  or on the basis that the order complained of was made. within the town  if so  it would seem to follow that the jurisdiction of the. high court would be avoided by the removal of the board of revenue beyond the. outskirts of the town and that it would never attach but for the circumstance. that an appeal is brought to  or proceedings in revision taken by  the board. of revenue   then followed the passage already quoted on which the. decision is no authority for dispensing with the necessity of the presence or. location  within the local limits of the court s jurisdiction  of the person. or authority to whom the writ is to be issued  as the basis of its power to. town of madras was not a sufficient basis for the exercise of jurisdiction. whereas both the subject matter  viz   the settlement of rent for lands in. ganjam  and the revenue officer authorized to make the settlement at first. instance were outside the local limits of the jurisdiction of the high court. if the court in madras were  recognised as having jurisdiction to issue the. cause of action and the parties concerned were within the territorial limits. of the jurisdiction  the high court could issue prerogative writs to persons. or authorities who are not within those limits. in any case  the decision did not turn on the construction of a statutory. provision similar in scope  purpose or wording to article 226 of the. constitution  and is not of much assistance in the construction of that. article. 1155 it was said that it could not have been contemplated that an inhabitant. of the state of madras  feeling aggrieved by a threatened interference with. the exercise of his rights in that state by an authority located in delhi and. acting without jurisdiction  should seek his remedy under article 226 in the. punjab high court  it is a sufficient answer to this argument of inconvenience. to say that  the language of the article being reasonably plain  it is idle to. speculate as to what was or was not contemplated. our attention has been called to certain decisions of high courts dealing with. the situation where the authority claiming to exercise jurisdiction over a. matter at first instance is located in one state and the appellate authority. is located in another state  it is not necessary for the purposes of this. appeal to decide which high court would have jurisdiction in such. circumstances to issue prerogative writs under article 226. in the view we have expressed above as to the applicability of article 226 to. the present case  it is unnecessary to enter upon a discussion of the question. whether article 192 1  applies only to members who  having been already. elected  have become subject to a disqualification by reason of events. happening after their election  but having heard the point fully argued before. us  we think it right to express our opinion thereon  especially as both sides. have invited us to do so in view of its general importance. the relevant provisions of the constitution on which the determination of the. question turns are as follows. 190    3  if a member of a house of the legislature of a state     a  becomes. subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause  1  of article 191. or  b  resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the speaker. or the chairman  as the case may be  his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 1156 191    1  a person shall be disqualified for being chosen as  and for. being  a member of the legislative assembly or legislative council of a state. a  if he holds any office of profit under the government of india or the. government of any state  specified in the first schedule  other than an office. declared by the legislature of the state by law not to disqualify its holder. b  if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court. c  if he is an undischarged insolvent. d  if he is not a citizen of india  or has voluntarily acquired the. citizenship of a foreign state  or is under any acknowledgment of allegiance. or adherence to a foreign state. e  if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by parliament. 192    1  if any question arises as to whether a member of a house of the. legislature of a state has become subject to any of the disqualifications. mentioned in clause  1  of article 191  the question shall be referred for the. decision of the governor and his decision shall be final. 2  before giving any decision on any such question  the governor shall obtain. the opinion of the election commission and shall act according to such. opinion. 193   if a person sits or votes as a member of the legislative assembly or the. legislative council of a state             when he knows that he is not. qualified or that he is disqualified for membership thereof  or that he is. prohibited from so doing by the provisions of any law made by parliament or. the legislature of the state  he shall be liable in respect of each day on. which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered. as a debt due to the state. as has been stated already  the respondent s conviction and sentence in 1942. disqualified him both for being chosen as  and for being  a member of the. legislative assembly under article  191  1   e  read with section 7 of the. representation of the people act  1951  1157 passed by parliament  the period. of five years since his release on 15th august  1947  not having elapsed. before the date of the election  the respondent having thus been under a. disqualification since before his nomination on 15th march  1952  could he be. said to have  become  subject to that disqualification within the meaning of. article 192   the rival contentions of the parties centred round the true. interpretation to be placed on that word in the context of the provisions. quoted above. dealing with  disqualifications of members   viz   articles 190 to 193  should. be read together  and as articles 191 and 193 clearly cover both preexisting. and supervening disqualifications  articles 190 and 192 should also be. similarly understood as relating to both kinds of disqualification  according. to him all these provisions together constitute an integral scheme whereby. disqualifications are laid down and machinery for determining questions. arising in regard to them is also provided  the use of the word  become  in. articles 190  3  and 192  1  is not inapt  in the context  to include within. its scope preexisting disqualifications also  as becoming subject to a. disqualification is predicated of  a member of a house of legislature   and a. person who  being already disqualified  gets elected  can  not. inappropriately  be said to  become  subject to the disqualification as a. member as soon as he is elected  the argument is more ingenious than sound. article 191  which lays down the same set of disqualifications for election as. well as for continuing as a member  and article 193 which prescribes the. penalty for sitting and voting when disqualified  are naturally phrased in. terms wide enough to cover both preexisting and supervening disqualifications. but it does not necessarily follow that articles 190  3  and 192  1  must also. be taken to cover both  their meaning must de end on the language used which. we think  is reasonably plain  in our opinion these two articles go together. and 150 1158 provide a remedy when a member incurs a disqualification after he. is elected as a member  not only do the words   becomes subject  in article. 190 3  and  has become subject  in article 192 1  indicate a change in the. position of the member after he was elected  but the provision that his seat. is to become thereupon vacant  that is to say  the seat which the member was. filling theretofore becomes vacant on his becoming disqualified  further. reinforces the view that the article contemplates only a sitting member. incurring the disability while so sitting  the suggestion that the language. used in article 190 3  can equally be applied to a pre existing. disqualification as a member can be supposed to vacate his seat the moment he. is elected is a strained and farfetched construction and cannot be accepted. the attorney general admitted that if the word   is   were substituted for. becomes  or   has become    it would more appropriately convey the meaning. contended for by him  but he was unable to say why it was not used. it was said that on the view that articles 190 3  and 192 1  deal with. disqualifications incurred after election as a member  there would be no way. of unseating a member who became subject to a disqualification after his. nomination and before his election  for  such a disqualification is no ground. for challenging the election by an election petition under article 329 of the. constitution read with section 100 of the representation of the people act. 1951  if this is an anomaly  it arises out of a lacuna in the latter enactment. which could easily have provided for such a contingency  and it cannot be. pressed as an argument against the respondent s construction of the. constitutional provisions  on the other hand  the attorney general s. contention might  if accepted  lead to conflicting decisions by the governor. dealing with a reference under article 192 and by the election tribunal. inquiring into an election petition under section 100 of the parliamentary. statute referrred to above. for the reasons indicated we agree with the learned judge below in holding. that articles 190 3  and 192 1  1159 are applicable only to disqualifications. to which a member becomes subject after he is elected as such  and that. neither the governor nor the commission has jurisdiction to enquire into the. respondent s disqualification which arose long before his election. 226 to issue any prerogative writ to the appellant commission  the appeal is.

[Facts] without obtaining the order of the magistrate  1st class 1 subsequently  m. further investigation and submitted a charge sheet  the respondent was tried. and convicted by the special judge under s  5  2  of prevention of corruption. been seriously prejudiced by the said contravention of the act. held  per subba rao and dayal  jj    that the first stage of investigation. made by m  before obtaining the requisite permission  of the magistrate  1st. detailed information of the offence alleged to have been committed by the. accused with necessary particulars  he proceeded to the spot of the offence. ascertained the relevant facts by going through the railway records  and. submitted a report  these acts constituted an investigation within the meaning. appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated january 30  1960  of. the allahabad high court  lucknow bench  at lucknow in criminal appeal no  643. of 1960. r l  mehta  g c  mathur and c p  lal  for the appellant. t r  bhasin  for the respondent. 1963   april 17  the judgment of subba rao and dayal jj   was delivered by. subba rao j  mudholkar j   delivered a separate judgment. subba rao j   this appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment of. the high court of judicature at allahabad  lucknow  bench lucknow setting. aside that of the special judge  west   lucknow  who convicted the accused. the act. the case of the prosecution may be briefly stated  the respondent was a. breach of trust in respect of rs  49 1 0  on the said allegations the accused. was sent up for trial before the special judge for offences under s  5  1. c   read with s. 5  2   of the act  before the special judge the prosecution filed a number of. documents numbering up to 124 and examined 20 witnesses  the accused admitted. before him that he had realized the amounts as alleged by the prosecution  but. pleaded that he had no dishonest intention  and that the deficit found was due. to inadvertance and oversight  the special judge considered the entire. evidence and found that the evidence adduced by the prosecution established. that the accused misappropriated the amounts received by him as a public. been made by subinspector mathur  who under the law was not entitled to. investigate the case  as he was below the rank of deputy superintendent and. hence the trial was vitiated  the learned special judge held that the said. sub inspector did not conduct any investigation before he obtained the. in the result he convicted the accused and sentenced him as aforesaid  on. appeal by the accused  the high court set aside the conviction mainly on the. ground that the subinspector mathur made  investigation  before he obtained. the permission of the additional district magistrate  judicial   lucknow  to. investigate the case and as the said investigation was in violation of the. prejudiced by the said contravention of the act  the high court also casually. observed that it was inclined to take the view that the prosecution had not. accused and acquitted 75 him  the state has preferred the present appeal. against the said judgment of the high court. the only question that was argued before us is whether the high court was. right in acquitting the accused on the ground that the investigation made by. him and  thereafter  after obtaining the requisite permission of the. magistrate he made an investigation of the offence and  therefore  there was. neither illegality nor irregularity in the matter of investigation  in any. view  the argument proceeded  the high court went wrong in setting aside the. conviction based on evidence without considering and coming to a conclusion. whether the said irregularity  if any  had prejudiced the accused. on the other hand  learned counsel for the accused  respondent  pressed on us. to hold that the investigation was made in consistent disregard of the. safeguards provided by the legislature in such a case and therefore the court. should  without any further proof  presume prejudice to the accused. to notice briefly the alleged irregularity committed by the prosecution in the. matter of investigation. on april 26  1956  a n  khanna  the railway sectional officer  special police. establishment  lucknow  sent report to the superintendent of police  special. police establishment  stating that he had received information through a. source that 76 the accused was in the habit of misappropriating government. money  giving 7 instances of the acts of misappropriations committed by him. special police establishment  as p w  15 says that on the receipt of the said. report  the said superintendent of  police directed him to make an enquiry. and he further says that on the basis of the information he checked the. railway records  found that the information was correct and submitted a report. accordingly  after he submitted the report  on october 8  1956  the said sub. inspector applied to the additional district magistrate  judicial   lucknow. for permission to investigate the case  on october 19  1956  the said. magistrate permitted him to investigate. thereafter  he made further investigation  seized documents  took statements. from witnesses and finally submitted a charge sheet against the accused. blank paper and other tickets  it also indicates that the information received. by the said officer was not vague  but contained precise particulars of the. acts of misappropriation committed by 78 the accused  on april 26  1956 he. sent a report of the information received to the superintendent of police. special police establishment  lucknow  indicating to him that if a proper. investigation was made many more cases of misappropriation would come to. light  on the receipt of the said report  the matter was entrusted to the said. mathur  a subinspector of police of the special police establishment  lucknow. as p w  20 he describes the steps he had taken pursuant to the information. given in the said report  he verified the allegations contained in the. information given by khanna  saw the relevant railway records after taking the. correct   on the basis of the information collected  he submitted a report. and submitted a report of the said acts  the said acts constituted an. with  for they were conceived in public interest and were provided as a. guarantee against frivolous and vexatious prosecution  the reason for the rule. was given thus  at p  208. while in the case of an officer of assured status and rank  the legislature. was prepared to believe him implicitly  it prescribed an additional guarantee. in the case of police officers below that rank  namely  the previous order of. a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class   as the case may. the offence alleged to have been committed by a public servant without. obtaining the order of a magistrate  first class   we hope and trust that. investigations under the act will be conducted in strict compliance with the. verified the railway records in the light of the information received by him. he registered the case  thereafter on october 8  1956  he applied to the. additional district magistrate   judicial   lucknow  for permission to. investigate the offence  therein he stated that no deputy superintendent of. police was posted for the lucknow branch of the special police j. establishment  the superintendent of police in eorwarding that application. endorsed that statement nd further pointed out that he was busy with the 82. supervision of other important cases and administrative duties  the magistrate. on october 19  1956  on the basis of the said facts gave the necessary. permission to the sub  inspector to investigate the offence  the sub inspector. thereafter made a detailed investigation  took statements  of witnesses. seized the relevant papers  got an investigation  made  when necessary through. other branches of the special police establishment  and thereafter submitted. the charge sheet  in short  after taking the permission of the magistrate  he. started practically a fresh investigation in strict compliance with the. said permission. after the investigation  the accused was tried by the special judge  the. prosecution examined 20 witnesses and filed 124 exhibits  the defence examined. 3 witnesses  the learned special judge  on a careful consideration of the. entire evidence  came to the conclusion that the prosecution had brought home. the guilt of the accused. setting aside the conviction on the ground that the first stage of the. investigation was contrary to the provisions of the act. mudholkar j   i have perused the  judgment prepared by subba rao  3   and i. agree with him that the appeal should be allowed and the respondent who was a. booking clerk at saharanpur at the relevant time should be convicted and. sentenced as proposed by him  i also agree that a mere irregularity in. investigation would not be a ground for setting aside the conviction of an. accused person unless the court is satisfied that the accused has been. establishment  lucknow  stating that he had received information through an. undisclosed source that the respondent is in the habit of misappropriating. government money  the superintendent of police  special police establishment. against the respondent  mathur thereupon went to the saharanpur railway. was thereafter that he obtained the permission of the additional district. consists of  a  the examination of various persons  including the  1    1954. insc 124  http   www liiofindia org in cases cen insc 1954 124 html     1955.
[Ratio of the decision] obtained permission of a magistrate  1st class  to investigate into the case. procedure and as such there was a contravention of s  5a of the prevention of. corruption act. subsequently m rectified the earlier defect by obtaining the permission of the. magistrate  1st class  to investigate into the offence alleged to have been. committed by the accused and in effect there was practically de novo. investigation in strict compliance with the provision of code of criminal. procedure  in fact  the accused has not been prejudiced by the illegality. committed by the police in the first stage of investigation  the conviction of. an accused cannot be set aside on the ground of some irregularity or. illegality in the matter of investigation. there must be sufficient nexus either established or probabilized  between the. conviction and the irregularity in the investigation. the correctness of the information  such preliminary enquiry does not amount. respondent and sentenced him to one year s rigorous imprisonment under s  5. 2  of the prevention of corruption act  no  ii of 1947   hereinafter called. requisite permission from the appropriate authority and that even if he did it. had not been established that the accused was prejudiced by such an enquiry. provisions of the act  the accused must be held to have been seriously. eliminated the reasonable possibility of the defence of the accused being. correct  for the said reasons the high court set aside the conviction of the. before we consider the merits of the rival contentions it would be necessary. and informing him that if a proper investigation was made many more cases of. misappropriation would come to light  mathur  the sub inspector of police. the first question is whether the enquiry made by him before he obtained the. police officer or by any person  other than a magistrate  who is authorized by. opinion as to whether on the material collected there is a case to place the. accused before a m agistrate for trial and if so taking the necessary steps. for the same by filing of a charge sheet under section 173   did mathur  the. sub inspector  make such an investigation before he obtained the permission of. the magistrate under s. 5a of the act   ex  p 113 shows that khanna  the railway sectional officer. received through a source information that the accused was in the habit of. misappropriating government money by not accounting for the saleproceeds of. permission of the station master and found the information given to be. but the full details of the enquiry were not mentioned therein  he also did. not prepare any case diary in respect of the said enquiry  the said report is. not in the record  we may assume that the sub inspector did nothing more than. what he states he did in his evidence  even so t e said police officer. received a detailed information of the offence alleged to have been committed. by the accused with necessary particulars  proceeded to the spot of the. offence  ascertained the relevant facts by going through the railway records. investigation within the meaning of the definition of  investigation  under s. 4  1 of the code of criminal procedure as explained by this court  the. hears something of interest affecting the public security and which. puts him on the alert  makes discreet enquiries  takes soundings and sets up. 80 ascertaining the  truth of the information and for detecting the crime. in this case  the information received was clear and precise and the sub. inspector  on the basis of the said information  went to the spot to. investigate into the truth of the allegations and indeed took some of the. crucial steps to detect the crime  we  therefore  hold that the sub  inspector. of the police made investigation of the offence before obtaining the requisite. arrest therefore without a warrant    it is manifest from the section that an. officer below the rank of a deputy superintendent of police cannot investigate. be  the magistrate s status gives assurance to the bona fide of the. investigation    notwithstanding the clear and express provisions of the. statute  in the present case the sub inspector made the investigation of. provisions of the act. but in this case the police officer realised his duty after he made some. investigation of the offence and hastened to rectify the defect  after he. provisions of the code of criminal procedure  indeed  no attempt has been made. to point out any defect or contravention of the provisions of the code of. criminal procedure in the matter of investigation after the granting of the. in these circumstances the question is whether the high court was justified in. or to implement his scheme  no doubt this practice  if it exists  must be. condemned  but the question is  does the infringement of the salutary. provisions of the act in the matter of investigation  without more  invalidate. the trial   if we accept the broad proposition advanced by the learned. counsel  we would be disregarding the provisions of s  537 of the code of. criminal procedure  we would be ignoring an honest body of compelling evidence. on the basis of the dereliction of duty by the police  the question is not. whether in investigating an offence the police have disregarded the provisions. of the act  but whether the accused has been prejudiced by such disregard in. the matter of his defence at the trial  it is  therefore  necessary for the. accused to throw a reasonable doubt that the prosecution evidence is such that. it must have been manipulated or shaped by reason of the irregularity in the. matter of investigation  or that he was prevented by reason of such. irregularity from putting forward his defence or adducing evidence in support. thereof  but where the prosecution evidence has been held to be true and where. the accused had full say in the matter  the conviction cannot obviously be set. aside on the ground of some irregularity or illegality in the matter of. investigation  there must be a sufficient nexus  either established or. probabilized  between the conviction and the irregularity in the. investigation   in this case  as we have earlier pointed out  not only the. trial was fair and the evidence convincing  but even the earlier defect was. rectified by having practically a de novo investigation in strict compliance. with the provisions of the code of criminal procedure  we cannot  therefore. hold that the accused has been prejudiced by the illegality 84 committed by. the police in the first stage of  the investigation  the high court st t. aside the conviction on the ground that there was a breach of the mandatory. safe guards of the act in that the first stage of the investigation was. contrary to the provisions of the act  but it did not consider the other. question whether the said breach caused prejudice to the accused in the matter. of  his trial  in doing so  the high court ignored the provisions of s  537 of. the code of criminal procedure  having carefully gone through the record  for. the reasons aforesaid  we are satisfied that no such prejudice has been caused. to the accused  he had a fair trial and had his full say  we  therefore  set. case. for the purpose of dealing with this point it is not necessary to set out all. therefore  set out only those facts which have a bearing upon this point. 85 upon receiving a report from the railway sectional officer  special police. directed sub  inspector mathur to verify the truth of the allegations made. station and with the permission of the appropriate authority went through. certain railway records and submitted a report to his superior to the effect. that the allegations made against the respondent appeared to be correct  it. magistrate  judicial   lucknow  to investigate into the case as required by s. 5a of the prevention of corruption act and then proceeded to investigate the. ease  the high court held that what subinspector mathur did before obtaining. the permission to investigate was nothing but investigation and that he had. done something which is prohibited by s  5a of the prevention of corruption. act  therefore  according to the high court the entire investigation was. vitiated and consequently the respondent s conviction and sentence could not. be sustained. what is investigation is not defined in the code of criminal procedure  but in. entitled to question persons who  in his opinion  are able to throw light on. the offence which has been committed and is likewise entitled to question the. suspect and is entitled to reduce the statements of persons questioned by him. to writing  he is also entitled  to search the place of the offence and to. search other places with the object of seizing articles connected with the. offence  no doubt  for this purpose he has to proceed to the spot where the. offence was committed and to  various other things  but the main object of. investigation being to bring home the offence to the offender the essential. part of the duties of an investigating officer in this connection is  apart. corruption act was enacted for preventing harassment to a government servant. and with this object in view investigation  except with the previous. permission of a magistrate  is not permitted to be made by an officer below. the rank of a deputy superintendent of police  where however  a police officer. or question any witnesses but merely makes a few discreet enquiries or looks. at some documents without making any notes  it is difficult to visualise how. any possible harassment or even embarrassment would result therefrom to the. suspect or the accused person  if no harassment to the accused results from. the action of a police officer how can it be said to defeat the purpose. underlying s  5a   looking at the matter this way  i hold that what mathur did. was something very much short of investigation and  therefore  the provisions. of s  5a were not violated  since no irregularity was committed by him there. is no occasion to invoke the aid of the curative provisions of the code.

[Facts] to the appellant company  united states surplus was materials consisting of. contracts  they were referred to arbitration as per cl  13 of the general. claims and counter claims and the umpire after deducting the amount of one. claim allowed to the appellant  held that the appellant was liable to pay to. the respondent rs. 34 70 226 50 and costs amounting to rs  5 40 544 00. the award was filed in the district judge s court and the appellant applied. for having it set aside on various grounds  the court held that with respect. to certain matters claimed by the respondent the umpire had no jurisdiction. and remitted the award for reconsideration of those items and also for. readjustment of the amount of costs  the high court confirmed the judgment of. appeared on the face of the award   2  several documents bearing on the scope. of the sales were not considered   3  the umpire went beyond his jurisdiction. when he awarded compensation to the respondent because the appellant removed. certain vehicles   4  that the umpire acted as a conciliator deciding matters. on conjecture   5  that the umpire fixed ground rent payable by the appellants. without any evidence  and  6  that the costs awarded were totally. since it was not the appellant s case that the respondent had claimed a higher. amount there was no sub  stance in the contention that the arbitrator fixed. amounts claimed by the parties  the volume of evidence  adduced and the number. nagaraja  for the appellant. l  m  singhvi  badri dass sharma and s  p  nayar  for the respondent. the judgment of the court has delivered by shelat  j  by this appeal  under. special leave  the appellantcompany challenges the correctness of the judgment. umpire s award  dated march 22  1958   the award was in respect of certain. disputes between the company and the union of india in the matter of disposals. these were sold to the company by the director general  disposals through. correspondence and sale notes  these contracts of sale were subject to the. general conditions of contract  form con  117   cl  13 of these general condi. tions provided that  in the event of any question or dispute arising under. proceeding on the reference. claims by the appellant company totalling ks. 6 73 34 500    and several counterclaims by the government of india  at the. end of the arbitration  the umpire  by his said award  disallowed all the. claims made by the company  except one for which he awarded rs  6 94 000   and. held  in respect of the counter claims filed by the government of india  that. the appellant company was liable to pay to the government in all rs. 36 23 682 50 p  and costs amounting to rs  5 40 544    in the result  after. deducting the claim allowed to the appellant company  the company was held. liable to pay to the government rs  34 70 226 50 p. the award having been filed by the umpire in the court of the  district judge. delhi and the government of india having thereupon applied for a decree in. term of the award  the company applied to the court for setting aside the. suffered from an error apparent on the face of the award in respect of the. appellant s claim no  111 a   and further held that the counter claims 11  iv. v and vi made by the government were not covered by the reference  and. consequently  the umpire had no jurisdiction to go into them  declining. no  111 a   dissatisfied with the judgment of the court the company filed an. appeal before the high court  the union of india also filed certain coss. objections  the high court heard the appeal and the cross objections together. and by its aforesaid juggment dismissed both the anneal and the cross. in support of the claim that the award was liable to be set aside  counsel for. the company submitted the following six propositions for our acceptance. 1   that the contracts of sale entered into by the company were misconstrued. by the umpire and such misconstruction appears on the face of the award. 2   that the umpire  as also the high court  failed to take into consideration. several documents while deciding the scope of the sales. 286. 3   that in respect of claim no  vi and counter claim no  vi of the. 287 been the basis of the award  thus  in landauer v  asser 1  the dispute. between buyers and sellers of goods was as to who was entitled to certain sums. receipt of sale note 160  the company wrote a letter on july 11  1946 in which. actually was sold to the company. the dispute  amongst other disputes  referred to the umpire and crystallized. by him in the form of issues on the pleadings of the parties involved  as. already stated  the question first as to what was sold  and secondly  arising. out of that  the question whether besides the said sale  notes 160 and 197. the subsequent clarifications or explanations were binding on the government. company under sale  note 197  dated august 2  6  1946   there is no dispute. that out of these vehicles the company removed 291 vehicles alleging that the. delivery of the balance of 256 vehicles was withheld  the company made a claim. being claim no  vi for the price of these 256 undelivered vehicles  the. respondents contention was that the sale to the company was confined only to. the u s a. surplus stores  that these vehicles did not fall within that category  but. were reverse land lease vehicles belonging to the government of india under an. agreement between the u s a  and india  on these allegations the respondents. laid counter claim no  vi claiming the price of the 291 vehicles admittedly. removed by the company when they were lying in jodhpur depot  calcutta. the umpire found that the expression  reverse land lease  related to the. reciprocal aid articles referred to in the said agreement  a reciprocal aid. article  according to that agreement   1    1923  a c  395    cgi. bin lawcite cit  5b1923 5d 20ac 20395. 294 meant an article transferred by the india government to the u s. government under reciprocal aid under para 4 c of that agreement   the u s a. government was deemed to have acquired as on september 2  1945 full title over. such articles except that such reciprocal aid articles incorporated into. installations in india were deemed to have been returned to india government. contract on the ground that it was obtained by a fradulent misrepresentation. see monro v  bognor urban district coun  cil 2   but a claim for damages on. the ground of negligence on  the part of the defendant in re moving the. plaintiff s furniture against a clause for due diligence in removing it was.
[Ratio of the decision] arbitration act  10 of 1940   s  30 setting aside award   error apparent on. the face of award what is. headnote. the director general of disposals  through correspondence and sale notes  sold. vehicles and other stores  disputes having arisen between the parties  both as. regards the contents of and the quantity of the vehicles deliverable under the. conditions of the contract between the parties  the disputes consisted of. aside  because    1  the contracts of sale were misconstrued and the error. disproportionate. held    1  when parties choose their own arbitrator to be the judge in the. dispute between them  they cannot  when the award is good on the face of it. object to the decision either upon the law or the facts  therefore  even when. an arbitrator commits a mistake either in law or in fact in determining the. matters referred to him  but such mistake does not appear on the face of the. award or in a document appended to or incorporated in it so as to form part of. it  the award will neither be remitted nor set aside  whether the contract or. a clause of it is incorporated in award is a question of construction of the. award  the test is  did the arbitrator corn     to a finding on the wording of. the contract  if be did  he can be said to have impliedly incorporated the. contract or the relevant clause but a mere general reference to the contract. in the award is not to be held as incorporating it   288 f h  289 a  union of. india v  bungo steel furniture pvt  ltd    1966  insc. arbitration  the umpires findings on them would bind the parties unless he. laid down any legal proposition such as a construction which is made the basis. of the award and is on the face of the award erroneous  the award showed that. the umpire had considered besides the sale notes the oral and documentary. evidence led by the parties as also the contentions urged by counsel  it could. not  therefore  be contended that the several documents were not taken into. consideration by the umpire   291 e f  292 e  h   b  the umpire laid down the. legal proposition that the clarifications or assurances given subsequent to. the dates of the sale notes were not binding on the respondent and could not. affect the scope of the sales  but the fact that he answered a legal point. which he had to decide while deciding the questions referred to him  did not. mean that he incorporated into the award or made part of it a document or. documents  the construction of which was the basis of the award  if there was. an error in such a case it could not be said to an error appearent on the face. of the award entitling the court to consider the various documents placed. before the umpire but not incorporated in the award so as to form part of it. and then to make a search if they had been misconstrued by him   293 b e   3. once it was found that it was competent for the umpire to decide that the. appellant company was not entitled to keep certain vehicles which it had. removed  he must  to do justice between the parties  order the appellant. either to return them or to pay compensation for them  since the first course. was not possible because of lapse of time the second was the only obvious. course  clause 13 of the general conditions provides for reference to. arbitration of all questions or disputes arising  under these conditions or in. connection with this co tract  and these words are wide and comprehensive. therefore  the umpire did not go beyond his jurisdiction in accepting the. respondent s counter claim for compensation   295 d e   4  merely because the. umpire held that even though the appellant was not entitled to some vehicles. claimed by it  yet the authorities had delivered a substantial number of them. without going into details  it could not be said that he bad acted without. evidence or that he behaved in the matter as a conciliator  or gave findings. on conjuncture and surmises  especially when the appellant withheld relevant. evidence which was in its possession   296 e f   5  under the contracts of the. sale  the appellant was bound to pay to the respondent ground rent and other. charges which the respondent in its turn was liable to pay the owners  and. the ground rent without any evidence   297 a c  284  6  considering the huge. these conditions or any special conditions of contract or in connection with. this contract the same shall be referred to the award of an arbitrator to be. nominated by the director general and an arbitrator to be nominated by the. contractor  or in the case of the said arbitrators not agreeing then to the. award of an umpire to be appointed by the arbitrators in writing before. upon every and any such reference  the assessment of the costs incidental to. arbitrators  or in the event of their not agreeing  of the umpire appointed by. them   285 disputes having arisen between the parties both as regards the. contents and the quantity of the vehicles delivered under the contracts  they. were referred  in the first instance  to two arbitrators nominated by the. parties  and ultimately to an umpire  the disputes were crystallized into nine. award urging several grounds for so doing  the district judge by an elaborate. judgment declined to set aside the award  he  however  held that the award. however  to set aside the award  he remitted it for reconsideration of the. aforesaid items and also for readjustment of the amount of costs in the evert. of enhanced compensation being awarded to the company in respect of its claim. government  the umpire acted beyond his jurisdiction as those question    did. not fall within the scope of the reference. 4   that the umpire did not act according to law but acted as a conciliator. and based his award on mere conjectures and surmises. 5   that his conclusion on ground rent awarded to the government was based on. no evidence. and. 6   that the costs awarded to the government were altogether disproportionate. before we proceed to consider these propositions  it is necessary to ascertain. the scope of  s  30 of the  arbitration act. 1940  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act aa1940137   and the. principles underlying that section  the general rule in matters of arbitration. awards is that where parties have agreed upon an arbitrator  thereby. displacing a court of law for a domestic forum  they must accept the award as. final for good or ill  in such cases the discretion of the court either for. remission or for setting aside the award will not be readily exercised and. will be strictly confined to the specific grounds set out in ss  16 and 30 of. the act  in hodgkinson vs. is the result of corruption or fraud  and one other  which though it is to be. regretted  is now  i think  firmly established  viz   where the question of. law necessarily arises on the face of the award  or upon some paper. accompanying and forming part of  the award   this observation was recently. cited with approval in union of india v  bungo steel furniture pvt  ltd   2. documents accompanying and forming part of the award  thus  if an arbitrator. were to refer to the pleadings of the parties so as to incorporate them into. the award  the court can look at them  in some cases  however  courts extended. the principle and set aside the award on a finding that the contract  though. only referred to but not incorporated into the award as part of it  had been. misconstrued and such misconstruction had  1   1857  3 c b  n s  189  202. arbitration and the umpire made his award basing it on the construction he. placed on the contract  namely  that as the parties to the contract were  by. the terms thereof  principals  their interest and liability in insurance was. defined to be the value of the invoice plus 5 per cent  on an application to. set aside the award  the court of appeal held that inasmuch as the umpire had. referred to the contract and the terms thereof  it was justified in looking at. the contract  and having done so  found that he had based his decision. entirely upon the terms of the contract  it also found that since the. contract  if properly construed  did not justify the decision  the award was. bad on the face of it and was liable to be set aside  a similar view appears. also to have been taken in f r  absalom ltd  v  great western  london  garden. village society ltd    2   where the award set out the relevant words and cl. 30 of the contract and also the conclusion of law on the meaning of those. the arbitrator would not induce the court to interfere unless the construction. given by the arbitrator is such that it is against the well established. principles of construction  see kelanton v  duff development co  1  i in an. illuminating analysis of a large number of earlier decisions  including. this matter  namely  that an award can only be set aside for error which is on. its face  it is true that an award can incorporate another document so as to. entitle one to read that document as part of the award and  by reading them. together  find an error on the face of the award   the question whether a. contract or a clause of it is incorporated in the award is a question of. construction of the award  the test is  does the arbitrator come to a finding. on the wording of the contract  if he does  he can be said to have impliedly. incorporated the contract or a clause in it whichever be the case  but a mere. general reference to the contract in the award is not to be held as. incorporating it  the principle of reading contracts or other documents into. the award is not to be encouraged or extender   see babu ram v  nanhemal   the. rule thus is that as the parties choose their own arbitrator to be the judge. in the dispute between them  they cannot  when the award is good on the face. of it  object to the decision either upon the law or the facts  therefore. even when an arbitrator commits a mistanke either in law or in fact in. determining the matters referred to him  but such mistake does not appear on. the face of the  1   1  1923 a c 395  2   1905  2 k b 184  3    1933  a c  592. cgi bin lawcite cit  5b1933 5d 20ac 20592   4   1962 2 all e r  53  62  5. c  a  no  1 07 of 1966  decided on 5 12 1968. 289 award or in a document appended to or incorporated in it so as to form. part of it  the award will neither be remitted nor set aside notwithstanding. the mistake. in the light of the principle above stated  the first question calling for. determination is  is there an error apparent on the award  in the sense that. the umpire misconstrued the contracts of sale inasmuch as though those. contracts were contained  in sale notes as well as in several letters  he. considered the sale notes only as containing the contracts of sale. disregarding the corres  pondence which had taken place between the company. and the director general  disposals and his officers   such a question would. undoubtedly be one of law  but the disputes referred to the umpire contained. disputes both of fact and law  ordinarily the decision of the umpire  even. though it be on a question of law  would be binding on the parties. the court would only interfere if the case falls within the exceptions. mentioned by williams  j  in hodgkinson v. fernie 1  and reaffirmed by diplock l  j   in giacomo costa fu andrea  v. according to the respondents were incorporated in sale notes nos  160   161. and 197  before the sale note 160 was issued on july 11  1946  it is a fact. that the company had written a letter dated july 10  1946 which was also. endorsed by two officers of the director  general  disposals  the letter. contained three clauses  the first of which stated that  m s  allen berry will. buy the moran vehicles depot  as is where is for rs  1 80 00 000. the two other clauses provided the manner and time of payment of the sale. price  but the letter commenced  with the following words. pending detailed record of terms tomorrow the following are the broad heads. of agreement  which will form the basis of sale of surplus vehicles   the next. day  i e   july 11  1946  the department issued sale note 160  which in clear. terms stated that what was purchased were  all vehicles and trailers lying in. we have sold u s  army surplus vehicles presumed to be borne on moran list. that is those actually in moran vehicle depot or those that were intended to. be moved to that depot  which was meant to be parking depot for surplus u s. required by the u s a s s  organisation   291 the question raised by counsel. is that the umpire failed to consider all these documents while considering. the scope and content of the contract of sale and relied on only sale note no. 160  dated july 11  1946  that the contract was not contained in the said note. 160 alone  and that therefore  he misconstrued the contract  and that that. misconstruction  which is a point of law  is apparent on the face of the. award  as it was made the very basis of the award. the first three issues raised by the umpire were  1  whether the appellant was. entitled to prove that any vehicles  stores etc  other than those mentioned in. the sale notes were sold to it. 2  whether the government was bound by the clarifications  representation. explanations or assurances made or given by any officer or officers of the. department regarding the subjectmatter of the contracts of sale except those. necessarily implicit in the sale notes. and  3  whether the government sold any vehicles except those lying in moran. depot on july 11  1946  or those intended to be moved thereto. the dispute between the parties  thus  clearly was that whereas the company. explanations or assurances given by any officer or officers of the department. could not vary or alter the terms of the contract  these expanations and. assurances were given  only to remove the misunderstanding of the company over. the question of the scope and extent of the sale made to it. the umpire set out part of the sale notes 160 and 197 in the award and then. observed  the language used in these sale letters is to my mind perfectly. clear  explicit and unambiguous and excludes the possibility of any vehicles. trailers or stores lying on the dates in question outside the locations. specified in the sale letters having been included in the two sales  the. contention that they in fact include all vehicular stores in assam in one case. respondents bound by them  they are not in accordance with law and do not. amount to legal contracts binding the respondents   these passages clearly. show that the umpire had considered  besides the sale notes  the oral and. documentary evidence led by the parties as also the contentions urged on and. as regards them by counsel for the company  it is impossible  therefore  to. uphold the contention that the various documents  i e   the letter of the. company dated july 10  1946   the subsequent correspondence  minutes of the. meetings which too place after the salenote 160 was issued etc  were not taken. into consideration by the umpire while coming to his conclusion as to what. these were  no doubt  questions partly of fact and partly of law  but. questions both of fact and law were referred to the umpire and prima facie his. findings on them would bind the parties unless  as explained earlier  the. umpire has laid down any legal proposition  such as a construction which is. made the basis of the award and is on the face of the award an error. 293 the point is  is this such a case   true it is that this is not  a case. where a question of law is specifically referred to  it is clearly a case. falling in the category of cases  like kalanton v  du  development co  ltd. 1  wherein deciding the questions referred to him the umpire has to decide a. point of law  in doing so  the umpire no doubt  laid down the legal propsition. that the clarifications or assurances given subsequent to the dates of the. said sale  notes by an officer or officers of the department were not binding. on the respondents nor could they affect the scope of the sales  that answer. the umpire  was entitled to give. but the fact that he answered a legal point does not mean that he has. incorporated into the award or made part of the award a document or documents. the construction of which  right or wrong  is the basis of the award  the. error  if any  in such a case cannot be said to be an error apparent on the. face of the award entitling the court to consider the various documents placed. in evidence before the umpire but not incorporated in the award so as to form. part of it and then to make a search if they have been misconstrued by him. this  in our understanding  is the correct principle emerging from the. decisions which counsel placed before us. in any event  this is not a case where the umpire  in the words of lord. dunedin   tied himself down to a legal proposition  which on the face of the. award was unsound. the award  makes it clear in so many words that he took into  account the. entire evidence  including the documents relied on by counsel and then only. came to the conclusion that it did not assist the company in its contention as. to the scope of the sales  contentions 1 and 2 raised by mr. agarwal  therefore  cannot be upheld. contention no  3 relates to 547 vehicles said  to have been sold to the. findings of the umpire were vitiated as there was total lack of evidence on. which they could be based  and secondly that in any event  the umpire had no. jurisdiction to award compensation to the government in respect of. counterclaim no  vi  the first part of the argument need not detain us as the. ownership in which vested in the government of india and were therefore not. u s a s s  was based on the agreement between the two governments and the. inventories produced before the umpire from which he could hold that they. belonged to the government of india from the date when the installations in. therefore  they could not form the subject matter of sale note 197 which. related only to the u s  surplus st ores. the second part of the argument  however  requires conside  ration  the. question is whether the arbitration clause included  a dispute relating to. compensation in respect of the said 291 vehicles unauthorisedly removed by the. company. cl  13 of the general conditions of contract  quoted earlier  provides for. reference to arbitration of all questions or disputes  arising under these. conditions  or  in connection with this  contract. dr  singhvi referred us to cl  10 of these conditions also but it is clear. that it can in no sense apply to the dispute relating to  compensation  but. the words  arising under these conditions   295 and  in connection  with this. contract  are undoubtedly wide and comprehensive  it is  nonetheless  a. question whether the dispute as to compensation on the ground of unauthorised. appropriation of these vehicles by the company falls within cl  13  in vidya. sagar  joshi v  surinder nath gautam 1  the words  expenditure  in connection. held to fall  within the arbitration clause  woolf v. collis remo val service  3  counsel conceded that a dispute as to the. interpretation of sale note 197 would fall under the arbitration clause   if. that is so  it must follow that the umpire was competent to decide whether the. said 547 vehicles fell within the purview of the sale note or not  if in. would the question as to the return or of compensation in lieu of such. vehicles  to which it was not entitled under the sale  be a question which. arises out of or in connection with the contract   counsel went as far as to. say that the umpire in deciding the company s claim no  vi and the. government s counter  claim no  vi could decide that the company was not. entitled to those vehicles  but could not take the next step either to direct. the return of them or payment of compensation in lieu of those vehicles  in. our view  such an argument cannot be accepted  the reason is that once it is. found that he was competent to decide the dispute as to whether the said 547. vehicles were not the subject matter of the sale and 291 of them were removed. unauthorisedly  he must  to do justice between the parties in respect of. disputes referred to him  order the company either to return them or to pay. compensation for them  since the first course was not possible after all these. years  the second was the only and the obvious course  the dispute raised by. the respondents that 291 vehicles were not included in the sale was  co. extensive with and connected with the dispute that the com    1    1968  insc. by the sale  on this reasoning it is not possible to say that the umpire went. beyond his jurisdiction either in rejecting the company s claim no  vi or in. accepting the corresponding counter claim no  vi of the respondents. contention 4 relates to 600 vehicles which had been taken out of moran depot. for operational purposes  but which the company claimed were part of the sale. under sale note 160. the umpire held  i that those vehicles having been taken out of the depot for. operational purposes did not fall within the sale  and  2  in the alternative. that the evidence disclosed that a substantial number of vehicles in. operational use were delivered to the company even though strictly speaking it. was not entitled to them as they were not lying in the  depot on  july 10. 1946  the umpire further held that if some of them per chance were not handed. over  the respondents had sufficiently compensated the company by handing over. several non operational vehicles from outside the depot to which the company. without any evidence to support it  and therefore  the umpire behaved in this. respect more like aconcilliator than as an arbitrator. having held that sale note 160 covered only those vehicles which were actually. of them  and for any deficiency  had also delivered non operational vehicles. there would be no purpose in going into the details of vehicles delivered to. the company  even though  as the judgment of the trial court discloses  para. 223   there was evidence  both oral and documentary  that the company had. collected a number of vehicles lying at places outside the depot  and the. vehicles so collected were recorded by the company  yet the company had. withheld the production of those records  in view of these facts it is. impossible to say that the umpire had acted without evidence  or that he. behaved in the manner of a conciliator  or gave findings on conjectures and. that the amount of such rent was fixed by the umpire without any evidence. there is hardly any substance in this contention  the sites  on which the. various depots were situated  were requisitioned by the government under the. 297 defence of india rules  the government had a statutory obligation. therefore  to pay to the owners of those sites compensation as provided by. those rules  under the contracts of sale the company was  bound to pay to the. government ground rent and other charges which the government in its turn was. liable to pay  it is  therefore  not correct to say that the umpire could. award only that amount which the government had actually paid and that the. umpire should  therefore  have taken an account from the government  it was. never the case of the company that the government had claimed ground rent. higher than the compensation it was liable to pay. the last objection was that the amount of costs awarded by the umpire to the. respondents was disproportionate  it appears from the award that the umpire. fixed the amount of costs after considering the statements of expenses. incurred by the parties for the hearing before him tendered by the respective. counsel for the parties  considering the huge amounts claimed by the parties. the volume of evidence  both oral and documentary  adduced by them  the number. of days occupied in recording that evidence and in arguing the case  we are. not prepared to say that the discretion which the umpire  exercised in the. matter of costs was exercised in breach of any legal provision or unreasonably. which can justify the court s intervention.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. home        databases   databases html     worldlii  http   www worldlii org. search   forms search1 html     feedback   liiofindia feedback html. supreme court of india. you are here      liiofindia         databases   databases html      supreme court of india           1973            1973  insc 108. database search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc     name. search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc title 1     recent. citation  1973 air 2313 1974 scr  1  178 1973 scc  2  413. act. indian penal code  s  366 when a person  takes  or  entices  away a minor girl. from the custody of her lawful guardian the scope of the section. headnote. the accused was convicted by the trial court under ss  366 and 376 i p c  on. appeal  the high court acquitted him of the offence under s  376 i p c   but. upheld the conviction and sentence under s  366 i p   c  on the ground that. the appellant had taken out a minor girl out of the keeping of her parents. her lawful guardian  with an intention that she may be seduced to illicit. intercourse. on appeal to this court  the appellant contended that since the girl left her. parents  house out of her own accord due to the harsh treatment of her parents. and as the appellant kept her in his house out of compassion and sympathy for. the helpless girl  the charge under s  366 i p c  was unsustainable. dismissing the appeal. held    i  the legal position with respect of an offence under s  366 i p c. is clear  in state of haryana v  raja ram   1972  insc. 265  http   www liiofindia org in cases cen insc 1972 265 html    a i r  1973. s c  819   cgi bin lawcite cit air 201973 20sc 20819  it was observed by this. court that the object of section 361 seems as much to protect the minor. children from being seduced for improper purposes as to protect the rights and. the two courts blow have rightly convicted the appellant under sec. 366 i p c   188g  state of haryana v  raja ram a i r    1973 s c  819   cgi. bin lawcite cit 1973 20sc 20819  referred to and s  varadarajan v  state of. madras   1965  1 s c r. 243 distinguished. criminal appellate jurisdiction   criminal appeal no  18 of 1970. appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated december 15  1969 of. the gujarat high court in criminal appeal no  827 of 1967. r  h  dhebar and s  k  dholakia  for the appellant. r  l  kohli and s  p  navar  for the respondent. 179 the judgment of the court was delivered by dua  j  this appeal by special. leave is directed against the judgment and order of the gujarat high court. allowing in part the appellant s appeal from his conviction by the court of. the sessions judge  jamnagar under ss  366 and 376  i p c  the high court. acquitted him of the offence under s. place on january 16  1967 and the offence of rape with which he was charged. was committed on the night between the 16th and 17th january  1967  as. observed by the high court  the background which led to the culmination. resulting in the commission of the offences leading to the appellant s trial. has been traced by mohin  the victim of the offences  in the prosecution. version  to the latter part of the year 1965  the appellant  an industrialist. had a factory at bunder road for manufacturing oil engines and adjoining the. factory was his residential bungalow  during the bombardment of jainnagar by. pakistan in 1965  mohini s parents came to reside temporarily at dhrol near. jamnagar. the appellant came to be introduced to that family and on december 18  1965. which was mohini s birth day  the appel  lant presented her with a parker pen. it may be pointed out that mohini was at that time a school going girl below. 15 years of age  she kept the pen for about 2 to 3 days  but at the instance. of her mother  returned it to the appellant. thereafter  the appellant went to baroda in his car and he took with him. mohini  her father liladhar jivraj  his manager tribhovandas  malti  daughter. of tribhovandas  who was about 12 years old  and harish  a younger brother of. malati  at baroda  the appellant negotiated some transaction with regard to. the purchase of some land for the purpose of installing a factory there  it. appears that there was some kind of impression created in the mind of mohini s. father that he would be employed by the appellant as a  manager of the factory. to be installed at baroda  the party spent a night at baroda and next morning. started on their return journey to jamnagar  during christmas of 1965 the. appellant had a trip to bombay and during this trip also he took with him  the. same party  viz  mohini  her father  tribhovandas and tribhovandas  daughter. and son  in bombay they stayed in metropolitan hotel for 2 nights  according. to the prosecution story it was during these two nights that mohini  malati. and the appellant slept in one room  whereas mohini s father  malati s father. and harish slept in another room  on these two nights the appellant is stated. to have had sexual inter course with mohini  during this trip to bombay the. appellant is also said to have purchased two skirts and waste bands for mohini. and malati  after their return to jamnagar  according to the prosecution. story  the appellant had sexual inter course with mohini once in the month of. march  1965 when she had gone to the appellant s residential bungalow at about. 7 00 p m  indeed  mohini used to visit the appellant s place off and on. during the summer vacation in 1966 the appellant had a trip to mahabaleshwar. in his car  on this occasion  along with mohini he took her two parents as. well as also his own daughter rekha  on their way to mahabaleshwar  they. stopped at bombay for 180 two days  after staying at mahabaleshwar for two. days  on their return journey they again halted at bombay for a night  and. then proceeded to mount abu  at mount abu they stayed for one day and all of. them slept in one room  at about 3 00 a m  when mohini s mother got up for. going to bath room and switched on the light  she noticed that the appellant. was sleeping by mohini s side with his hand on her head  mohini s mother. restrained herself and did not speak about what she had seen because the. appellant had requested her not to  do so  next morning  the party went to. ambaji from where they returned to jamnagar  at jamnagar mohini s mother. informed her husband about what she had seen during the night at mount abu. mohini s father got annoyed and rebuked mohini  her mother also warned her. against repetition of such conduct  mohini apologised  the appellant  on. coming to know of the feelings of mohini s parents  told her father that. mohini was just like his own daughter rekha to him and that he would even go. to dattatraya temple and swear by god to that effect  the appellant is stated. to have actually taken mohini s father  mohini and rekha to dattatraya temple. in jamnagar and placing his hands on the heads of mohini and rekha swore that. they were his daughters  even after this incident in dattatraya temple  the. appellant once met mohini when she was returning from her school and took her. to his own bungalow in his car  there  he had sexual intercourse with her  it. seems that mohini s parents came to know about this incident and they rebuked. her  mohini s parents also started taking precaution of not sending her alone. to the school  from july  1966 onwards either the maid servant or mohini s. mother herself would accompany her to the school. the appellant is stated to have made an effort to contact mohini during  this. period  he called her at his house on saturday  september 24  1966  mohini s. mother having come to know of this behaviour on the part of the appellant. wrote to him a letter dated september 26  1966 requesting him to desist from. his activity   ties of trying to contact mohini  apparently  after this letter. there was no contact between mobini and the appellant in jamnagar  in october. 1966  however  mohini had gone to ahmedabad in school camp and there the. appellant contacted her and took her out for a joy ride in company with two of. her girl friends. thereafter  in the months of november and december  1966 nothing particular. seems to have happened  according to the appellant  however  during those two. months  mohini had written letters to him complaining of ill treatment by her. parents and expressing her desire to leave her parent s house   we would refer. to those letters a little later. early in january  1967  the appellant is alleged to have told mohini to come. to his bungalow  on january 16  1967  mohini started for her school with a. school book and two exercise books  in the company of her mother narmada who. had to go to court for some work  upto the court premises  they both went. together where smt  narmada stayed on and mohini proceeded to her school. instead of going to her school  she apparently went to the appellant s. factory  according to a previous arrangement  there the appellant met her and. took her inside his motor garage  from there she was taken to the attached. room and made to write two or three letters on his dictation  she did so while. sitting on two tyres. these letters were  181 stated to have been addressed to her father  to the. district superintendent of police of jamnagar  and to the appellant himself. these letters contained complaints of ill  treatment of mohini by her father. and mother and information about the fact that she was leaving for bombay. after taking rs  250   from the appellant  according to the postal stamps. these  letters appeared to have been cleared from the post office at 2 30 p m. on january 16  1967. thereafter  according to the prosecution version  mohini was made by the. appellant to sit in the dicky of his car which was taken to some place  mohini. remaining in the dicky for some hours  she was then taken to the office of his. factory at mid night and there he had sexual inter course with her against her. will  after the sexual inter course  there was some sound of motor car. entering the compound whereupon the appellant took her inside the cellar in. the office  and asked her to sit there  after about an hour the appellant came. and took her from the cellar to his garage where she was again made to remain. in the dicky  it appears that the following morning the appellant told mohini. that he was called to the police station  he went there in his car with mohini. in the dicky and then he and the police man came back to his bungalow  the. police man went inside the bungalow and the appellant parked the car in h is. garage  he took mohini out of the dicky and told her to go to the inner room. of the garage  this inner room had four doors  one of them opened on the main. road and another in the garage  feeling thirsty  mohini went out in the garden. and saw a mall working there whom she asked for water  it appears that at. about 6 30 p m  the appellant came to the inner room and promised to bring. some food  water and clothes for mohini  telling her to wait for him in that. room  after some  time  he returned with food  water and clothes  mohini. changed her clothes washed her face and started taking her meal. while doing so  she felt that some motor car had come  into the compound  the. appellant told her that police had come and  therefore  she must leave through. the back door and go to the road side directing her to go towards gandhinagar. and wait there for him  leaving her food unfinished  mohini went out and. waited near gandhinagar at a distance of about one furlong from the. appellant s garage  it was here that she was traced by the police sub. inspector chaudhary who came there with the appellant in the latter s car at. about 9 00 p m  from the dicky of the appellant s motor car  one bedding and. some clothes belonging to mohini  viz   skirt  blouse nicker and petticoat. were  found  these  clothes were wet  her school books and two exercise books. were also found there  in the inner room of the garage was found unfinished. food and utensils which bore the name of the appellant  mohini was sent for. medical examination by the lady medical officer  but the medical officer did. not find any symptoms of forcible sexual inter course. turning now to the scene at the house of mohini s parents  after her mother. smt  narmada finished with the court work  she returned to her house  they had. a visitor dinkerrai from rajkot  while they were all at home some school girls. informed mohini s mother that mohini had not gone to the school that day  smt. narmada at once  suspected the appellant and therefore went to his house along. with dinkerrai  on enquiry from the appellant  he expressed his igno  182. rance about mohini s whereabouts  he  however  admitted that she had come to. him for money but had gone away after taking rs  250 from him  this according. to him had happened between 4 and 5 30 p m  on that day viz  january 16  1967. mohini s father then lodged complaint with the police at about 7 20 p m  on. that very day  the police sub inspector visited the appellant s bungalow in. the night between 16th and 17th of january and searched the bungalow but did. not find mohini there  thereafter  the  sub inspector again went to the. appellant s bungalow on the morning of the 17th january and attached some. letters and other papers produced by the appellant  he also went to the. appellant s office and inspected the books of account for the purpose of. verifying whether there was any entry about the payment of rs  250   to. mohini  meanwhile  mohini s father liladhar received a letter bearing post. mark dated 16 1 1967 which was produced by him before the police sub. inspector  on the night of 17th january  police sub inspector chaudhary went. to the appellant s bungalow and it was this time that mohini heard the sound. of a motor car and left the garage at the instance of the appellant leaving. unfinished the food she was eating  in the inner room  next to the garage. were found mohini s clothes  a lady s purse  one comb  2 plastic buckets full. of water  one lantern and some other articles. from the dicky of the appellant s car on search were also found skirt  one. blouse  a petticoat and one book and two exercise books as already noticed. all these articles belonged to mohini  this in brief is the prosecution story. the appellant admitted that he had developed intimate relations with the. family of mohini  but denied having presented to her a parker pen in december. 1965  he also admitted his trips to baroda and bombay in december  1965 when. he took with him mohini  her father malati  her mother and malati s brother. he admitted having stayed in metropolitan hotel at bombay but denied that he. mohini and malati had slept in one room and that he had sexual inter  course. with mohini during their stay in this hotel  he also denied having sexual. inter course with mohini in the month of march  1966  he further denied having. purchased skirts and waste bands for mohini and malati in bombay in december. 1965   the trip to mahabaleshwas during summer vacation and also the trip to. mount abu were admitted by the appellant but he denied having been found. sleeping with mohini by mobini s mother at mount abu  he admitted the incident. of dattatraya temple in jamnagar but this he explained was due to the fact. that mohinis parents had heard some false rumours about his relations with. mohini  and that he wanted to remove their suspicion  he further admitted that. in the evening of 16th january  narmada and dinkerrai had approached him to. inquire about mohini s  whereabouts but according to him mohini had merely. taken rs  250 from him without telling him as to where she was going  he. denied having told dinkerrai teat mohini had gone to bombay. according to his version  mohini approached him on january 16  1967 and. requested him to keep her at his house for about 15 days because she was tired. of harassment at the bands of her parents  she added that she would make her. own arrangements after 15 days  the appellant 183 expressed his inability to. keep her in his house and suggested that he would take her to her parents. house and persuade them not to harass her  she  however  was firm and adamant. in not going back to her parents  house at any cost. was that mohini s father wanted the appellant to appoint him as a manager at. baroda where the appellant was planning to start a new factory  the appellant. having declined to do so because he had many senior persons working in his. office  mohini s father felt displeased and concocted the false story to. involve him. the trial court in an exhaustive judgment after considering the case from all. relevant aspects came to the conclusion that mohini was born on september 18. 1951 and that the medical evidence led in the case also showed that she was. above 14 and below 17 years of age during the relevant period  she was. according held to be a minor on the day of the incident  if  therefore  the. appellant had sexual intercourse with her even  with her consent  he would be. guilty of rape  mohini was believed by the trial court when she stated that. the appellant had sexual inter course with her at the earliest possible. opportunity as this was corroborated by the medical evidence  the trial court. found no reason for her to stake her whole life by making false statement. about her chastity  nor for her parents to encourage or induce her to come out. with a false story  there being no enmity between the appellant and the family. appoint mohini s father as a manager of his factory at baroda  she had  in. collusion with the parents  concocted this story was considered by the trial. in fact  according to the trial court it was the appellant who had made a. suggestion about appointing mohini s father as his manager at baroda and this. explained why mohini s father was taken by the appellant to baroda when he. bearing in mind the common course of human conduct  that it was the appellant. who had induced mohini to leave her parents  house on the day in question and. to have sexual inter course with her. the trial court also considered that part of mohini s statement that when she. went to the appellant s place  he told her to return to her school  suggesting. that he would take her to her parents and persuade them not to harass her and. it expressed its undoubted opinion that the appellant had  used those words to. make a show of being her well  wisher  so that  if some proceedings were. started against him  he could put forth the defence that he had kept mohini at. his house only at her own request and not with the object of keeping her out. of her parents  custody for having sexual inter course with her  the trial. court got support for this view from 184 the letters got written by the. appellant in mohini s handwriting  this is what that court said in this. connection. nothing prevented the  accused from returning mohini to her parents  in any. case  even if it were held that it was not the duty of the accused to return. mohini to her parents  it can equally he said that it was not legal on the. part of the accused to secretly confine mohini at his place and have sexual. intercourse with her   the trial court then quoted the following passage from. the case of christian officer  reported in 10 cox  420     although she may. not leave at the appointed time and although he may not wish that she should. have left at that particular time  yet if  finding she has left  he avails. himself of that to induce her to continue away from her father s custody  in. my judgment he is also guilty  if his persuasion operated on her mind so as to. induce her to leave   on the basis of this observation  the trial court held. that in the present case  the inducement given by the appellant operated on. mohini s mind to stay in his house and do as he told her to do  the trial. court on a consideration of the circumstances of the case and of the. subsequent conduct of the appellant came to the definite conclusion that. mohini had gone to the appellant s place at his instance and subsequently. taking advantage of that position she was persuaded by the appellant to stay. months. the substantive sentences of imprisonment were to run concurrently. on appeal by the appellant  the high court also considered the matter at great. length and in a very exhaustive judgment  the appellant s conviction under s. 376 was set aside and he was acquitted of that offence  this acquittal was. ordered because the charge being only for sexual intercourse on the night of. appellant with respect to the offence under s  376  i p c  but there being no. appeal against acquittal  we need say nothing more about it  the appellant s. conviction for the offence punishable under s. 366  i p c  and the sentence for that offence were  however  upheld  the high. court felt that the story of mohini with regard to the appellant s call about. the appellant leaving her parental home  this was all the more so because in. the past year or so  the appellant had treated mohini very fondly by taking. her out on trips to different places in his own car and had also lavishly. given her gifts of articles like costly pens and silver band  the high court. also took into consideration the attitude adopted by mohini s mother in this. connection  she had very discretely warned the appellant in a dignified and. was  she introduced an element of sensation in her story  her complaint about. inter course on this occasion was not accepted for want of independent. the medical evidence also suggested that there was no presence of spermatozoa. when vaginal swab was examined. it was on this reasoning that the offence under s  376  i p c  as charged was. held not to have been proved beyond doubt  the presence of mohini in the. appellant s house and also in his garage on the 16th and 17th january was held. by the high court to be fully established on the record  the version give by. mohini was held to be fully corroborated by the surrounding circumstances of. the case and by the recoveries of various articles belonging to her  the high. court also came to the positive conclusion that there was no unreasonable. delay on the part of the investigating authorities to record mohini s. statement  the suggestion on behalf of the appellant that various articles. belonging to mobini and the utensils found in the inner room of the. appellant s premises were planted  was rejected outright. the high court in a very well reasoned judgment with respect to the offence. under s  366  i p c  came to the conclusion that the appellant had taken. mohini out of the keeping of her parents  her lawful guardian  with an. intention that she may be seduced to illicit inter course  this is what the. high court observed  have come in contact with the family of mohini in about. november 1965 the appellant cultivated relationship with them to such an. extent that he took mohini  and her parents out on trips in his car spending. lavishly by staying in hotels in ahmedabad  bombay  mahabaleshwar and mount. abu  he also presented mohini with a parker pen on 18th de  cember  1965. within a few days thereafter he purchased by way of gift to mohini skirt. silver waist band which as per unchallenged testimony of mohini was worth. about rs  1 2. he was actually found by the side of mohini in mohini s bed by mohini s mother. at mount abu. his con  186 nection with mohini was suspected and in spite of that as the. letters of mohini show he was in correspondence with her without the knowledge. of her parents  mohini was a school girl of immature understanding having. entered her 16th year less than a month before the incident  out of emotion. she wrote letters to the appellant exaggerating incidents of rebuking by her. mother and beating  she how  ever was quite normal from 1st january  1967. the appellant having come to know about the frame of her mind disclosed from. the letters of november and december 1966  took chance to take away this girl. from her parents  with that view he told mohini about 4 days before 16th. january  1967 to come to his house and added that he will keep her with him. permanently  this possibly caught the imagi  nation of the girl and the result. was that on 16th january she left her father s house with bare clothes on her. body and with school books and went straight to the appellant  the appellant. in order to see that her view to his factory during day time may not arouse. suspicion of other invented the story of giving rs  250   to mohini and also. got written 3 letters by mohini addressed to himself the district. superintendent of police jamnagar and mohini s father  he kept her in the. garage of his bungalow for 2 days  tried to secret her from police and her. parents and had already made attempt on 16th to put police and parents of. mohini on wrong track  there is no scope for an inference other than the. inference that mohini was kidnapped from lawful guardianship  with an. intention to seduce her to illicit inter course  the intention contemplated by. section 366 of the indian penal code is amply borne out by these. circumstances  therefore  the conviction of the appellant under that section. is correct and has to be maintained   as already observed  the appellant was. these circumstances  among others  show that the main substratum of the story. as revealed by mohini in her evidence  is probable and trustworthy and it.
[Ratio of the decision] noteup   form search  method boolean query insc 1973 108 or 1973 insc 108. lawcite   cgi bin lawcite  cit 1973 insc 108. help   liiofindia help cases html. thakorlal d  vadgama v  the state of gujarat  1973  insc 108  air 1973 sc. 2313  1974  1  scr 178  1973  2  scc 413  2 may 1973. dua  i d. dua  i d. mathew  kuttyil kurien. whoever kidnaps a woman for illicit intercourse or for the purpose of marriage. against her will   187c   ii  the word  takes  in section 361 i p c  does not. necessarily connote taking by force and it is not confined only to use of. force  actual or constructive  this word merely means  to cause to go    to. escort  or  to get into possession   the word  entice  means to involve the. idea of inducement or allurement by giving rise to hope or desire in the. other  if the minor leaves her parental home  influenced by any promise  offer. or inducement emanating from the guilty party then the latter will be guilty. of an offence as defined in s  361 i p c   187h   iii  in the present case. the circumstances in which the appellant and the victim came close to each. other and the manner in which be is stated to have given her presents etc  and. the letters written by the victim to the appellant furnish very important and. essential background to the offence which the appellant committed  therefore. 375  i p c  but maintained his conviction and sentence under s  366  i p c. of mohini with respect to any matter  which would induce them to charge him. falsely  the appellant s explanation that as a result of his refusal to. paid a visit to that place for purchasing land  the court found no other. cogent reason for taking mohini s father to baroda. the trial court in express terms disbelieved the appellant s explanation  that. court also cane to the conclusion  on consideration of the evidence and. there is therefore  no doubt in my mind that the accused had prepared all. this material so that in case criminal proceedings were taken against him by. mohini s parents  he may be able to lead plausible defence of his innocence. accepted as safe and free from all reasonable doubt  in the absence of. independent corroboration  in adopting this approach the high court seems to. us to have been somewhat over indulgent  and unduly favourable to the. 3 or 4 days before the incident in question was so natural and so highly. probable that it felt no hesitation in accepting it  the circumstances. preceding the incident were considered 185 by the high court to be. sufficiently telling to lend assurance that it was quite safe to act upon her. testimony. her account was considered to be quite truthful and  therefore  acceptable. mohini s version that the appellant had told her about 3 or 4 days before the. incident of january 16  1967 that he would keep her permanently at his place. provided sufficient temptation to the school going girl like mohini to go to. respectful language to leave mohini alone and also expressed her. disappointment and unhappiness at the manner in which the appellant used to. behave towards mohini  the high court considered a part of mohini s version. as to how she was kept in the dicky of the appellant s car on the 16th and. 17th january  1967  to be improbable and to have been exaggerated by her  but. this was considered to be due to the fact that  like a school girl that she. acquitted of the offence under s  376  i p c   but his conviction and sentence. under s  366  i p c  was upheld. in this court  shri dhebar addressed very elaborate arguments and took us. through considerable part of the evidence led in the case with the object of. showing that the conclusions of the two courts below accepting the evidence. led by the prosecution with respect to the charge under s. 366  i p c  is wholly untrustworthy and no judicial mind could ever have. accepted it  after going through the evidence to which our attention was. drawn  we are unable to agree with the appellant s learned counsel  both the. courts below devoted very anxious care to the evidence led in the case and the. circumstances and the probabilities inherent in such a situation  they gave to. the appellant all possible benefit of the circumstances which could have any. reasonable hearing in his favour  but felt constrained to conclude that the. appellant was proved beyond reasonable doubt guilty of the offence under s. 366  i  p  c. the appellant s main argument was that it was mohini who feeling unhappy and. perhaps harassed in her parent s house  left it on her own 187 accord and came. to the appellant s house for help which he gave out of compassion and sympathy. for the helpless girl in distress  mohini s parents were  according to the. counsel  unreasonably harsh on her on account of some  erroneous or imaginary. suspicion which they happened to entertain about the appellant s attitude. towards their daughter or about the relationship between the two  and that it. was primarily her parent s insulting and stern behaviour towards her which. that the charge under s  366  i p c  was in the circumstances unsustainable. the legal  position with respect to an offence under s  366  i p c  is not in. without the consent of such guardian  the words  takes or entices any. minor         out of the keeping of the lawful guardian of such minor  in s. 361  are. significant  the use of the word  keeping  in the context connotes the idea of. charge  protection  maintenance and control   further the guardian s charge. and control appears to be  compatible with the independence of action and. movement in the minor  the guardian s protection and control of the minor. the consent of the minor who is taken or enticed is wholly immaterial  it is. only the guardian s consent which takes the case out of its purview  nor is it. necessary that the taking or enticing must be shown to have been by means of. force or fraud  persuasion by the accused person which creates willingness on. the part of the minor to be taken out of the keeping of the lawful guardian. would  be sufficient to attract the section. in the case cited reference has been made to some english decisions in which. it has been stated that forwardness on the part of the girl would not avail. the person taking her away from being guilty of the offence in question and. that if by moral force a willingness is created in the girl to go away with. the former  the offence would be committed unless her going away is entirely. voluntary  inducement by previous promise or persuasion was held in some. english decision to be sufficient to bring the case within the mischief of the. statute  broadly  the same seems to us to be the position under our law  the. expression used in s. 361  i p c  is  whoever takes or entices any minor the word  takes  does not. necessarily connote taking by force and  it is not confined only to use of. force  actual or constructive   this word merely means   to cause to go9    to. escorts  or  to get into possession   no doubt it does mean physical taking. but not necessarily by use of force or fraud  the word  entice  seems to. involve the idea of inducement   1    1972  insc. valid defence and would not absolve him. the  question truly falls for determination on the facts and circumstances of. admits of no reasonable doubt as to its truthfulness  we have  therefore  no. hesitation in holding that the conclusions of the two courts below with. respect to the offence under s  3 66  1  p c  are unexceptionable  there is. absolutely no ground for interference under article 136 of the constitution. on the view that we have taken about the conclusions of the two  courts below. on the evidence  it is unnecessary to refer to all the 189 decisions cited by. shri dhebar  they have all proceeded on their own facts  we have enunciated. the legal position and it is unnecessary to discuss the decisions cited  we. may however briefly advert to the decision in s  varadaraja v. we are not concerned with enticement but what  we have to find out is whether. the part played by the appellant amounts to  taking   out of the keeping of. the lawful guardian of  savitri  we have no doubt that though savitri had been. left by s  natarajan at the house of  his relative k  natarajan  she still. continued to be in the lawful keeping of the former but then the question. remains as to what is it which the appellant did that constitutes in law. taking   there is not a word in the deposition of savitri from which an. inference could be drawn that she left the house of k. natarajan at the instance or even a suggestion of the appellant  in fact she. candidly admits that on the morning of october 1st  she herself telephoned to. the appellant to meet her in his car at a certain place  went up to that place. and finding him waiting in the car got into that car of her own accord  no. doubt  she says that she did not tell the appellant where to go and that it. was the appellant himself who drove the car to guindy and then to mylapore and. other places  further  savitri has stated that she had decided to marry the. appellant. from this passage  shri dhebar tried to infer that the case before us is. similar to that case and  therefore  mohini herself went to the appellant and. the appellant had absolutely no involvement in mohini s leaving her parents. home  now the relevant test laid down in the case cited is to be found at page. 248     it must  however  be borne in mind that there is a distinction between. taking  and allowing a minor to accompany a person  the two expressions are. not synonymous though we would like to guard ourselves from laying down that. in no conceivable circumstance can the two be regarded as meaning  the same. thing for the purposes of s  361 of the indian penal code. we would limit ourselves to a case like the present where the minor alleged to. have been taken by the accused person left her father s protection knowing and. having capacity to know the full import of what  she was doing voluntarily. joins the accused person  in such a case we do not think theft the accused can. be said to have taken her away from the keeping of her lawful guardian. something more has to be shown in a case of this kind and that is some kind of. inducement held out by the accused person or an active participa  tion by him. in the formation of the intention of the minor to leave the house of the. guardian. 2    1964  insc. 191  http   www liiofindia org in cases cen insc 1964 191 html     1965  1. s c r  243    cgi bin lawcite cit  281965 29 201 20scr 20243. 190 it would  however  be sufficient if the  prosecution establishes that. though immediately prior to the minor leaving the father s protection no. active part was played by the accused  he had at some earlier stage solicited. or persuaded the minor to do so  in our opinion if evidence to establish one. of those things is lacking it would not be legitimate to infer that the. accused is guilty of taking the minor out of the keeping of the lawful. guardian merely because after she has actually left her guardian s house or a. house where her guardian had kept her  joined the accused and the accused. helped her in her design not to return to her guardian s house by taking her. along with him from place to place  no doubt  the part played by the accused. could be regarded as facilitating the fulfilment of the intention of the girl. that part  in our opinion  falls short of an inducement to the minor to slip. out of the keeping of her lawful guardian and is   therefore  not tantamount. to  taking. it is obvious that the facts and the charge with which we are concerned in the. present case are not identical with those in varadarajan s case  supra   the. evidence of the constant behaviour of the appellant towards mohini for several. months preceding the incident on the 16th and 17th january 1967 completely. brings the case within the passage at s  248 of the decision cited  we have. before us ample material showing earlier allurements and even of the. appellant s participation in the formation of mohini s intention and resolve. to leave her father s house  the appellant s conviction must  therefore  be. upheld. in so far as the question of sentence is concerned  we are wholly unable to. find any cogent ground for interference. the conduct and behaviour of the appellant in going to the temple and. representing that mohini was like his daughter merely serves to add to the. depravity of the appellants conduct  when once we believe the evidence of. mohini with respect to the offence under s  366  i p c  though the appellant. has been acquitted of the offence of rape  for which he was also charged  we. cannot shut our eyes to his previous improper intimacy with mohini on various. occasions as deposed by her  they were not taken into account as substantive. evidence of rape on earlier occasions for reasons best known to the. prosecution and the charge under s  376  i p c  was not framed with respect to. the earlier occurrences  but the previous conduct of the appellant does.

[Facts] period of 12 years immediately precedings the 11th day of april  1969. dismissing the appeal and the special leave petitions. pay to the appellant a sum of rs 50 000 as ex gratia payment in full and final. settlement of his claim  the court directed that an amount of rs 50 000 shall. be deposited by the respondents in trial court within three months with. 114e. civil appellate jurisdiction  civil appeal no  165 of 1974 etc. from the judgment and decree dated 22 10 1973 of the kerala high court in s a. no  580 of 1970. t s  krishnamoorthy iyer and n  sudhakaran for the appellants. the judgment of the court was delivered by balakrishna eradi  j  after hearing. the special leave petitions. 11th day of april  1967   the high court has taken the view that the benefit. of the above section would apply only to persons whose occupa  tion of the. private forests or unsurveyed lands had a lawful origin and not to persons m. unlawful occupation based on trespass or forcible and unlawful entry  we are. of opinion that the said interpretation placed by the high court on the. land on the 11th day of april  1957  on the basis of that deed. protection on persons who had wilfully trespassed upon lands belonging to. occupation  occurring in section 7d must be construed as meaning  in lawful. occupation   in the present case the finding of fact entered by the high court. to pay to the appellant a sum of rs 50 000 as ex gratia payment in full and. final settlement of whatever claims the appellant may have towards the value. leave petitions  are dismissed  the parties will bear their respective costs. the amounts depos  ited in the trial court by the receiver may be withdrawn by. the respondents herein. a p j  appeal   petitions dismissed. liiofindia      copyright policy   liiofindia copyright html         disclaimers   liiofindia disclaimers html         privacy policy   liiofindia privacy html         feedback   liiofindia feedback html. url   http   www liiofindia org in cases cen insc 1987 140 html.
[Ratio of the decision] in the instant case  the high court while interpreting s  7d took the view. that the benefit of s  7d would apply only to persons whose occupation of the. 3   in the present case  the finding of fact entered by the high court is that. the appellant had come into posses  sion of the lands by trespass  his plea. before the courts below was that he was himself the owner of the area having. acquired title to it by adverse possession  in such circum  stances the high. court was fully justified in holding that the appellant was not entitled to. the protection ors  7d. 114d   in view of the offer made by the respondents that they are prepared to. p s  poti  s b  saharya and ms  ratna nair for the respondents. counsel appearing on both sides we do not find any merit in this appeal and. the sole question raised before us in the appeal con  cerns the interpretation. predecessor in interest was continuously in occupation of such land for not. less than two years within a period of twelve years immediately preceding the. section is perfectly correct. for a proper understanding of the scope and intendment of section 7d  it is. occurs in the act. person for a period of not less than ten years preceding the commencement of. the kerala land reforms  amendment  act  1969. the commencement of the kerala land reforms  amendment  act  1969  on the. basis of a registered deed purporting to be a lease deed  shall be deemed to. be a tenant if he or his predecessor in interest was in occupation of such. notwithstanding the fact that the lease was granted by a person who had no. right over the land or who was not competent to lease the land. person who had no right over the land or who was not competent to lease the. tenant holding land less in extent than the ceiling area  had executed a deed. surrendering his leasehold right to the landlord  but had not actually. transferred possession of the land to the landlord before the commencement of. this act  such deed shall be deemed to be invalid and such person shall be. grant protection only to persons whose posses  sion had a lawful origin in the. sense that they had either bona fide believed the lands to be government s. lands of which they could later seek assignment or had taken the lands on. lease from persons whom they bona fide believed to be competent to grant such. leases or had come into posses  sion with the intention of attorning to the. within the contemplation of the legisla  ture to confer the benefit of. having acquired title to it by adverse possession  in such circumstances the. high court was in our opinion fully justified in holding that the appellant. was not entitled to the protection of section 7d  the appeal  is  therefore. devoid of merits. of the rubber trees standing in plots  a  b and c or in any other respect  we. record this submission and direct that an amount of rs 50 000 shall be. subject to the aforesaid observation and direction  the appeal and the special.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. on the death of father of the plaintiff no  1  sadashiva the suit land was. assigned to sitabai mother of plaintiff no  1 and that on the death of sitabai. the property devolved on the respondent no  1 and his 6 sisters  it was also. contended that the house built on a portion of the land in dispute and. occupied by the defendants should be removed by the defendants and the. defendants should be directed to hand  over vacant possession of the plot to. the respondents  the appellants in their written statement pleaded that the. suit property was given on perpetual lease to the ancestors of the appellants. and that no rent was paid for over 40 years. the trial court decreed the suit  an appeal filed by the appellants before the. learned additional judicial commissioner was dismissed  when the matter came. up before this court by special leave this court remanded the matter to the. court of the judicial commissioner for a finding on the plea of prescription. raised by the appellants  the learned judicial commissioner after remand came. to the conclusion that the appellants have failed to prove the acquisition of. full title to the suit property by prescription under the law in force at the. relevant time. the learned judicial commissioner also held that the appellants failed to. establish their plea of perpetual lease. partly allowing the appeal. held   1  in view of the earlier decision of this  court this court would be. justified in deciding the appeal only on the question of plea of prescription. the appellants had been in continuous possession of the entire plot of land. described in para 1 of the plaint which has a larger area including the. portion where the house of the appellant stands  in the year 1920  the. respondents sought to make their construction on the vacant portion of the. appellants. v  m  tarkunde  v  n  ganpule and a  g  ratnaparkhi  for the respondents. the judgment of the court was delivered by goswami  j  the appellants in this. appeal by special leave jose da costa and his wife  isabela braganca  are the. defendants and the respondents  bascora sadashiva sinai narcornim and his. wife  durgabai narcornim  are the plaintiffs in the original suit. the plaintiffs instituted a suit in the court of judge of quempem comarca on. february 27  1961  in accordance with the portuguese law then in force in. those territories for ejectment of the defendants from the suit property  it. was alleged that on the death of sadashiva  father of the plaintiff  bascora. in partition proceedings with minors  inventario   this plot was assigned to. bascora s mother  sitabai  towards her moiety in the estate  on sitabai s. death  the property devolved on the plaintiffs  bascora and his six sisters. 1069 acquired the rights from some of his sisters and became the owner of the. suit property with other heirs  bascora s parents had inherited this property. from their ancestors. the father of bascora had permitted the ancestors of the defendants to build a. latter event  they shall be entitled to remove the super structures of the. building raised by them. even so  the plaint goes on to say that caetana esperanca fernandes  the. mother of the appellant  jose da costa  executed a deed on november 16  1920. before the notary public of comarca  which indicated that she and her family. members were owners of the plot  on the basis of this deed  the defendants. asserted ownership of that part of the plot on which stands the house built by. their ancestors and now in their occupation. on the above allegations  the plaintiffs prayed for a declaration that the. plaintiff  bascora  and the other heirs of his mother  sitabai  are the only. owners of the plot in dispute and that the house in the occupation of the. defendants on a part of that plot was constructed in the circumstances and. subject to the terms mentioned in the plaint  they further prayed that the. defendants be directed to vacate the plot after removing the materials of. their house. the defendants denied the allegations and pleaded that it was vishnu bascora. sinai narcornim  an ancestor of the plaintiffs  who had given the suit. property on perpetual lease to pascoal da costa  an ancestor of the defendants. in the year 1875  at an annual rent of rupees 2 4    it was stated further. that no such rent has been paid for over forty years before the suit nor has. any rent ever been claimed by the family of the plaintiffs for such a long. time  it was pascoal da costa who possessed the plot as his own and originally. built one house on it but subsequently his descendants constructed more houses. so that at present there are three houses and one stable on the plot in. dispute  on pascoal de costa s death  in inventario proceedings  this property. on november 16  1920  was  consolidated in full ownership in the patrimony of. the descendants of the said pascoal da costa   the defendants further aver in. their written statement that the suit property has been in their  open. acquired title by prescription. the trial court decreed the suit on april 30  1966  directing the defendants. to remove their superstructures on the land or in the alternative to receive. for the purpose  on appeal the learned additional judicial commissioner. dismissed the same on january 20  1968  and affirmed the decree of the trial. court  the defendants came to this court by special leave against the judgment. of the additional judicial commissioner and this court by its order dated. august 1  1070 1975  which has since been reported in air 1975 s c  1853. remanded the appeal to the judicial commissioner for a finding on the plea of. prescription raised by the defendants by observing as follows    the plea of. prescription goes to the root of the matter  it was raised by the defendants. in their pleadings and the matter was put in issue  it was again taken up in. the grounds of appeal filed in the court of the judicial commissioner  but was. commissioner  goa daman and diu with the direction that it should after. rehearing the parties record a specific finding on the issue as to whether the. defendants had acquired full title to the suit property by prescription under. the law in force at the relevant time  the judicial commissioner shall submit. his report with reasons therefor to this court within four months from the. the judicial commissioner has since submitted his report dated december 5. after examining the entire evidence  oral and documentary  the judicial. commissioner has come to the conclusion that the defendants have failed to. prove their acquisition of full title to the suit property by prescription. under the law in force at the relevant time. during the hearing we did not have before us any printed portuguese civil code. refer  counsel for the appellants  however  produced certain extracts from. various articles to which counsel for the respondents has not taken any. exception  there is also reference to certain articles from the portuguese. executing party  in a deed drawn up on 16 november  1920  by the former notary. public of this comarca  salinho da silva  wherein a plot having the. denomination of  deulacodil tucda  or  mordi  was partitioned  one third of. which was assigned to the said caetana  and with basis in that partition the. defendants allege to be the owners of the ground whereon the said house raised. by their ascendants is situate   indeed this repudiation of title of the. plaintiffs by the defendants gave rise to the cause of action  we cannot. accept the submission of mr  tarkunde on behalf of the respondents that the. years old  the grandfather of the deponent pascoal da costa and his uncle. francisco piedade costa and even the deponent s mother opposed the said. building raised by the plaintiff  the question was amicably solved at the. house of narcornins bencares to which the plaintiff belongs  to the effect. that the plaintiff should build the house and reside in it as well as the said. persons who had their houses in it should continue to reside therein  the. deponent came to know of these facts regarding the dispute and its solution. after hearing his said uncle francisco piedade da costa   1072 apart from the. defendants  at that time apparently the defendants later agreed to the. construction by the plaintiffs and that seems to be the reference to the. amicable  solution in the above extract. so far as the land on which the defendants had their house  there was no proof. nor any evidence of any change on the part of the defendants to their open. ever asked for its payment to the deponent  that is defendant no  1  and other. members of his family   this statement cannot be torn from the context of the. alternative plea set up by the defendants  this statement is fairly consistent. with the alternative plea of perpetual lease of the land set up by the. defendants  according to the defendants the land had been in their occupation. on perpetual lease from vishnu narcornim  the plaintiffs  paternal uncle and. judicial commissioner mistook the defendants  admission of the alleged. perpetual lease under visnum narcornim as permissive occupation under the. plaintiffs even after holding that the defendants failed to establish. perpetual lease. the defendants of the land with the residential house thereon since the time. of their ancestors after a clear repudiation of the title of the plaintiffs to. event the prescription shall run from the date of inversion of the title  sole. prescription set up by the defendants. it is significant that even the plaintiffs  being out of possession of the. land in suit for a long number of years and having constructed their house on. a house on portion of the land only in the year 1920  sought to establish the. title to the property  by virtue of the prescription that operated in their. favour   see paragraph 3 of the plaint. the land in occupation of the defendants and for their eviction so far as that. portion of the land with their house on it is concerned is dismissed. the plaintiffs  suit for declaration in respect of the remaining portion of. person other than the defendants  that claim is rejected  we express no. opinion with regard to the claim of persons who may be in occupation of the. land other than the defendants who are not impleaded in the suit and against.
[Ratio of the decision] defendant appellants from the suit property  it was alleged in the plaint that. peaceful and continuous possession including that of their predecessors in. interest as owners for a period of more than 50 years and that the have. acquired a title by prescription. land close to the appellants  house which led to opposition and obstruction. from the appellants  later on  the appellants agreed to the construction by. the respondents  however  so far as the land on which the appellants had their. house is concerned there was no proof nor any evidence of any change on the. part of the appellants to their open hostility to the respondents  title to. the same  the respondents did not give any evidence of any such amicable. administrator without even caring to know the result of such action against. the appellants of their own title  to the land on which their house stands. erred in holding that the appellants have not been able to prove an overt act. of possession to the knowledge of the respondents. according to art  474 of the portuguese civil code possession is defined as. holding or fruition of anything or right  the acts done by licence or. permission do not constitute possession  according to article 505 things and. rights are acquired by virtue of possession  just as obligations are. extinguished by reason of not demanding their fulfillment  the law lays down. conditions and the period of time 1068 that are necessary for one as well as. for the other thing and that is called prescription  under article 528 of the. portuguese code in the absence of registration of possession or title of. acquisition prescription with respect to immovable property or rights to. immovable will operate by virtue of possession for 15 years  under art  529. when the possession of immovable property or rights to immovable property has. lasted for a period of 30 years prescription will operate  under the. portuguese law what appears to be clear is that permissive possession is not. sufficient to prescribe title of the owner of the land  there is no evidence. whatsoever for the conclusion of the judicial commissioner that the possession. of the appellants was permissible under the respondents  on the other hand. evidence is against recognition by the appellants of any title in the. respondents  we are  therefore  left with the long continuous and peaceful. possession by the appellants of the land with the residential house thereon. since the time of their ancestors after a clear repudiation of the title of. the respondents to the land in 1920  the fact that the appellants set up title. in vishnu narcornim describing him as respondents  ancestor does not affect. the position in view of the respondents  denial that vishnu had anything to do. with the land  the judicial commissioner fell into an error by not keeping the. distinction between vishnu s title and the respondents  title  the origin of. ownership of land being dipped in the misty past what emerges from the. evidence in the absence of proof of lease or permission by the respondents. own ancestors is that the appellants have been in long and open possession of. the land over which they have constructed their house for a period long enough. for that possession to ripen into ownership  the appellants have acquired. title to the said land by prescription  since there is no proof of permissive. possession under the respondents or their ancestors there is no question of. confined his claim in this case only to the land on which appellants have. their house  the suit of the respondents so far as it relates to the portion. of the land on which the appellants have their house is dismissed and in. respect of the remaining portion of land is decreed   1070g  1072a d  1073a h. 1074a c  1075d e. civil appellate jurisdiction  civil appeal no  1521 of 1968 appeal by special. leave from the judgment and decree dated the 20th january  1968 of the court. of addl  judicial commr   goa daman diu in civil appeal no  213 of 1966. u  r  lalit  k  rajendra chowdhary  mrs  veena khanna and s  l  setia  for the. before the partition of the property among the legal heirs of sitabai  bascora. house for their residence on a part of the property subject to the condition. that they shall have to vacate the plot when called upon to do so  in the. interest  as owners for a period of more than 50 years and that they have. from the plaintiffs rs  1084   which was found to be the value of the. materials of the house in question as per estimate of the experts appointed. left undecided  for the purpose of doing complete justice in the case  we. think it necessary to have the advantage of the finding of the court below on. this issue  accordingly  we remit this case to the court of the judicial. of this case from the above decision. 1975  and the appeal has come up before us for final hearing. or any standard legal treatise to which we would have ordianily liked to. civil code in the earlier judgment of this court as also in the report. as correct  although the original books are not before us. in view of the earlier decision of this court and after hearing the parties we. feel that we will be justified to decide this appeal only on the question. relating to the plea of prescription. since the original perpetual lease was not produced in court and a certified. copy of the original translation of the perpetual lease issued on november 23. 1920  was alone produced  we have no reason to disagree with the conclusion of. the judicial commissioner that the defendants failed to establish their plea. of perpetual lease of  the land. before we may proceed further it will be appropriate to note that even the. plaintiffs themselves laid a nucleus for the plea of adverse 1071 possession. to be easily taken up by the defendants  para 5 of the plaint may  therefore. be quoted    5  notwithstanding this  the mother and mother  in law of the. defendants caetana esperanca fernandes with the ambition of alleging to the. said plot of the plaintiffs rights that do not assist her  participated as an. word  allege  in the above paragraph in the present tense makes any difference. in the matter of the plea. not only in the plaint  but also in the evidence  the plaintiff bascora gave. further reinforcement to the plea of adverse possession when he stated thus. in 1920 the deponent  that is the plaintiff   desiring to build the house. existing in the plot of land  there were disputes raised by defendant s mother. and by one santana costa and then the deponent  that is the plaintiff. notified them through the administration office of sanguem to vacate the plot. land  he does not know what subsequent course his petition had    mr  tarkunde. and the plaintiffs built the house on the suit land and the defendants also. tarkunde draws our attention to the following passage in the evidence of. defendant no  1    in 1920 more or less  the plaintiff built a house in the. plot in question and begun to stay there  the same house was built very near. the house where the deponent  that is the defendant no  1  stays and which. already existed at the time of that building  the dependent was about 14 or 15. fact that the above is hearsay evidence we are clearly of the view that the. statement is not sufficient to annihilate the theory of repudiation of the. title of the plaintiffs to the property  it stands to reason that the. defendants had been in continuous possession of the entire plot of land. described in para 1 of the plaint which is a larger area including the portion. where the house of the defendants stands  in the year 1926 the plaintiffs. sought to make their construction on the vacant portion of the land close to. the defendants  house which led to opposition and obstruction from the. hostility to the plaintiffs  title to the same  the plaintiffs did not give. any evidence of any such amicable solution  on the other hand  it is admitted. that they had reported to the administrator without even caring to know the. result of such action against the defendants  the further fact that along with. the plaint the plaintiffs annexed a certified copy of the partition deed of. november 16  1920  which copy was obtained as early as on december 22  1920. goes to show that they were fully cognizant of the public assertion by the. defendants of their own title to the land on which their house stands. repudiating that of the plaintiffs  mr. tarkunde submits that there is no evidence that this document had been. actually obtained by the plaintiffs  but production of the document without. any explanation from the side of the plaintiffs speaks a volume about their. knowledge of the repudiation of title. that the plaintiff for reasons of enmity does not receive this rent nor he. once that would have been acknowledged by the plaintiffs the defendants would. perhaps be willing to pay even to the plaintiffs the annual rent  but it is. the clear case of the plaintiffs that the story of perpetual lease was false. and fraudulent and besides that visnum narcornim had no interest in the land. and was not competent or authorised to lease out the same  we  therefore. cannot accept the exaggerated importance to the above statement of the. defendant no  1 in his cross examination. the judicial commissioner  however  rightly observed that  an overt act of. possession to the knowledge of the plaintiffs and their 1073 ascendants must. be shown to have taken palce   from the above discussion  we have no. hesitation in arriving at the conclusion that the defendants have been able to. establish the same and the judaical commissioner is not right in taking a. contrary view. according to article 474 of the portuguese civil code   possession is defined. as holding or fruition of any thing or right  para 1  the acts done by licence. or permission do not constitute possession     according to article 505. things and rights are acquired by virtue of possession  just as obligations. are extinguished by reason of not demanding their fulfillment. the law lays down conditions and the period of time that are necessary for one. as well as for the other thing  this is called prescription. proviso  the acquisition of things and rights is known as positive. prescription  the discharge of the obligations by reason of not demanding. their fulfillment is known as negative prescription   article 528 reads thus. in the absence of registration of possession or title of acquisition. prescription with respect to immovable property or rights to immovable will. operate by virtue of possession for 15 years   article 529 of the code is as. follows    when  however  the possession of immovable property or rights to. immovable property referred to in the foregoing article has lasted for a. title can be averred  except the provisions of article 510   thus even under. the portuguese law what appears to be clear is that permissive possession is. not sufficient to prescribe title of the owner of the land. the judicial commissioner was not right in holding that possession of the. defendants was permissive under the plaintiffs  there is no evidence is. against recognition by the defendants of any title the evidence is against. recognition by the defendants of any title in the plaintiffs as such  the. we are  therefore  left with the long  continuous and peaceful possession by. the land in 1920  the fact that the defendants set up title in visnum. narcornim describing him as plaintiffs  ancestor  does not affect the position. in view of the plaintiffs  avowed denial that visnum narcornim had anything to. do with the land  visnum narcornim is survived by his own descendants and we. are not dealing with a case where visnum narcomim s heirs as such have sought. 1074 eviction of the defendants from the land  the plaintiffs do not accept. visnum narcornim s title to the land as their title  the judicial commissioner. fell into an error because of not keeping the distinction between visnum. narcornim s title to the land and the plaintiffs  title to the same  the. origin of ownership of the suit land being dipped in the misty past what. emerges from the evidence  in the absence of proof of lease or permission by. the plaintiffs  own ancestors  is the defendants have been in long and open. possession of the land over which they have constructed their house for a. period long enough for that possession to ripen into ownership  the defendants. in our opinion should be held to have acquired title to the said land by. prescription. there being no proof whatsoever of permissive possession under the plaintiffs. or their ancestors  there is no question of application of the rule laid down. para  the title is said to be inverted when it is substituted by another title. capable of transferring the possession or ownership  dominio    according to. the judicial commissioner the above article is applicable and since the. defendants could not prove that there had been at some time  inversion of. title  their possession was merely  detencao   namely  a precarious. possession  and such physical detencao without  animus  cannot be invoked for. the purpose of claiming any effect that possession in one s own name or as of. right connotes. it is difficult to see how article 510 can be attracted to the instant case. the defendants had at no time possessed the land on which their house stands. in the name of the plaintiffs  they were never accepting the position of. permissive possession under the plaintiffs and had asserted perpetual lease. under visnum narconim  who  even according to the plaintiffs  was an. unauthorised person  article 510 would not be attracted to this case when the. defendants alternatively were possessing in the name of visnum narornim or his. descendants  article 510 is  therefore  clearly out of the way  we are. therefore  not even required to consider whether there was any  inversion of. title  in this case or not. it is clear that the defendants  ancestors and  after them  the defendants. have been in possession of the land since 1875  title of the plaintiffs was. repudiated openly in the year 1920  the defendants are in possession by. occupying the house standing on the land and the house was constructed by the. defendants  ancestors  the plaintiffs had made a complaint about their conduct. in denying their title to the land and in opposing their construction as early. as in 1920. years till the institution of the suit in 1961 clearly establishes the plea of. describing the land in suit acknowledged it as  the plaintiffs  land   it may. not be overlooked that the plaintiffs also have their own house on a part of. the land. we  therefore  cannot agree that the defendants  witnesses by identifying the. land in suit in that manner defeated the claim of the defendants with regard. to the adverse possession. which the defendants have their house. the appeal is  therefore  partly allowed  the plaintiffs  suit for title to. the land  however  is decreed  as there is no prayer for eviction of any.

[Facts] the petitioners moved this court u s 406 crl  p  c   1973 r w order xxxvi. supreme court rules  1966  when their matter was at the investigation stage. itself for an order of transfer of the case to some other court. dismissing the petition for transfer  the court.
[Ratio of the decision] appeal from one high court or a court subordinate to one high court to another. high court or to a court subordinate thereto. but it does not clothe this court with the power to transfer investigations. from one police station to another in the country simply because the first. information or a remand report is forwarded to a court  the application before. us stems from a misconception about the scope of  s  406. there is as yet no case pending before any court as has been made clear in the. counter affidavit of the state of tamil nadu  in the light of this counter. affidavit  nothing can be done except to dismiss this petition. if the petitioners are being directed to appeal in a far off court during. so that they may not be tormented by long travel or otherwise teased by. judicial process  if justice is denied there are 605 other redresses  not. under s  406  though it is unfortunate that the petitioners have not chosen to. move that court to be absolved from appearance until necessitated by the. circumstances or the progress of the investigation  to come to this court. directly seeking an order of transfer is travelling along the wrong street  we. are sure that if the second petitioner is ailing  as is represented  and this. fact is brought to the notice of the court which has directed her appearance. just orders will be passed in case there is veracity behind the. representation  we need hardly say courts should use their processes to the. purpose of advancing justice  not to harass parties  anyway  so far as. thepetition for transfer is concerned  to borrow a cliche  the less said the.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. home        databases   databases html     worldlii  http   www worldlii org. search   forms search1 html     feedback   liiofindia feedback html. supreme court of india. you are here      liiofindia         databases   databases html      supreme court of india           1977            1977  insc 100. database search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc     name. search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc title 1     recent. decisions     recent html. noteup   form search  method boolean query insc 1977 100 or 1977 insc 100. lawcite   cgi bin lawcite  cit 1977 insc 100. lakshmi chand khajuria   ors v  smt  ishroo devi  1977  insc 100  air 1977. sc 1694  1977  3  scr 400  1977  2  scc 501  31 march 1977. on the strength of a will dated 25th may 1959  executed in her favour by one. purohit mani ram  the respondent smt. ishroo devi filed a suit for recovery of the schedule property in the plaint. it was alleged in the plaint that the appellants  a 1  son  a 2  wife  and. a 3  grand daughter of purohit mani ram  after the death of purohit mani ram. to the joint family of which the first appellant and his father purohit mani. ram were members and as the properties were joint family properties  they. cannot he disposed of by will  it was further alleged that the will was a. forged one and is fictitious  the trial court  accepting the evidence of pw1. an advocate  who advised in the preparation of the will and also an attest. ing witness  pw2 the scribe and pw3 who deposed the fact that the properties. were self acquired ones of late purohit mani ram  decreed the suit as regards. escape the prohi  bition against alienation introduced by ordinance which came. partition filed by the son against mani ram  the latter gave an undertaking in. the court not to alienate his properties which would improbalise the execution. of the will   ii  the hereditary profession of mani ram being that of a priest. whatever he earned while practising that profession and all his acquisitions. favour of the respondent  modified the decretal order of the high court in. 9 of 1966   g b  pai  s k  bagga and mrs  s  bagga  for the appel  lants. 402 o  p  malhotra  k j  john and shri narain for the respond  ent. the judgment of the court was delivered by kailasam  j    this appeal is. preferred by the defendant in the suit on a certificate of fitness granted by. the high court of jammu   kashmir under article 133 of the constitu  tion. the respondent  ishroo devi  filed a suit for a decree for possession of all. the three items of property mentioned in the plaint and for future mesne. profits  it was al  leged that the three items of property mentioned in the. same date the signature of the testator and those of the witnesses were. affixed  at the time of the examination the witness stated that the physical. and the mental condition of the testator was good and he read out the will at. the house of janak lal sehgal and obtained the signatures of mani ram and that. of p w  1  the advocate  p w  3  lodra mani  stated that mani ram was the. a d c  of maharaja pratap singh and was in service for maharaja s puja  and. the witness also stated that item 1 of the properties was constructed by mani. ram with his own income. on behalf of the appellants a handwriting expert  philip hardless  and three. witnesses were examined in addition to the first appellant. the trial court accepted the evidence of p w  1  the advocate  and p w  2  the. scribe and held that the will was proved  holding that items 1  b  and 2 of. the plaint schedule properties were ancestral properties found that mani ram.
[Ratio of the decision] help   liiofindia help cases html. kailasam  p s. kailasam  p s. gupta  a c. citation  1977 air 1694 1977 scr  3  400 1977 scc  2  501. act. testamentary will disposing of the ancestral property to a far relation. whether valid under s  27 of the jammu   kashmir hindu succession act  1956. scope of s  27 and explanation thereto  whether income of a hereditary priest. a hereditary property  mitakshara law as applicable to jammu   kashmir  though. a wife cannot demand a partition she is entitled to receive a share equal to. that of a son and to hold and enjoy that share separately even from her. husband. headnote. the records and that the three items of the schedule property were the. separate properties of the testa  tor and that he was entitled to dispose them. under the will. the appellants averred in their written statement that the properties belonged. item no  1  a  of the plaint schedule but dismissed the claim as regards items. l b  and 2 holding that they were ancestral ones  on ap  peal  the high court. accepted the findings of the trial court and confirmed the decree as regards. item l a  of the property but modified the order as regards item l b  and 2 by. allowing the claim of the respondent to the extent of 1 2 share since under s. 27 of the jammu   kashmir hindu succession act mani ram was entitled to. dispose of his interest in the joint family property by will. in appeal by certificate to this court  the appellant contended   i  the will. was not a valid one for the reasons  namely   a  it was ante dated in order to. into force in july 1959   b  the signature on the will was forged   c  the. will is a most unnatural one as it had not provided for the son or the wife or. should be held to be joint family property   iii  in view of the mitakshara. law applicable to the estate when partition of the joint family property takes. place during the father s life time at the instance of the son  the mother. also has a share equal to him. the court confirmed the decree in respect of item 1  a  of the property in. respect of items 1 b  and 2 of the schedule property as 1 3rd in favour of. appel  lant no  1  1 3rd in favour of appellant no  2 and 1 3rd in favour of. respondent as entitled by the will  the court. held   1  the plea that the will was executed after july 1959 when there was a. prohibition against the alienation and that it was pre dated and not executed. 401 on the day on which it purports to be is without any sub  stance and. against the evidence on record   403 h  404 a   2  the contention that the. will is an unnatural one is also without substance  the non disclosure of the. execu  tion of the will is understandable because mani ram did not want. anyone  particularly his son  to know about his pos  sessing of the property. by will   404 b  d   3  the findings of the two lower courts that the will is. a genuine one and was executed by mani ram by his own free will cannot be. assailed  in fact  there was no chal  lenge to the gist of the will noted by. pw2  the scribe  in one of his regularly kept record  there was no denial by. the first appellant  the son of mani ram that the signature found in the will. was not that of his father and there is no reason why the cogent evidence of. pw 1  a respectable advocate who spoke of his advising in the preparation of. the will having seen the executant sign the will in his presence be not. accepted   405 a c   4  the income from the practice of a hereditary profes. sion will not be a joint family property  item 1  a  of the property is the. self acquisition of mani ram and the decree of the appellate court so far as. item no  1  a  is concerned must be confirmed   406 a  d  hanso pathak v. harmandil pathak and anr   air 1934 allahabad 851  approved. 36 born  94  over ruled. 5  under the mitakshara law excepting madras  in the other states referred to. in the decisions cited when there is a partition between the son and his. father the mother is entitled to a share equal to that of the son  in the in. stant case the case of the first appellant was that the joint family consisted. of himself and his father alone  though in the earlier partition suit filed by. him he claimed 1 3rd share conceding that his father and mother are entitled. to the other 2 3rd share  as no decision in re  spect of the interest of the. male hindu in jammu   kashmir was cited the question is remitted to the high. court for decision as to what is the extent of the interest as regards items. his share under a will  admittedly the respondent  will be entitled to 1 3rd. plaint were the self acquired properties of one purohit mani ram  he executed. a will on 25th may  1959  out of his own free will in favour of the. respondent  the origi  nal will was attached to the plaint  purohit mani ram. died on 24th march  1960  at jammu and the respondent claimed to be the sole. owner of the properties. with his own hand where he had signed as witness  the witness also testified. that the mental condition of purohit mani ram was good and he executed the. will of his own free will and no pressure or fraud was played on him  p w  2. bodh raj  is the scribe of the will  he stated that he wrote the will at the. instance of mani ram and after reading the  will and explaining it to the. testator  the testator affixed his signature and admitted it to be correct. according to the witness the will was executed on 25th may  1959  and on the. that the maharaja was giving 403 lot of money to purohit mani ram as present. had no authority to dispose of these two items of properties by will. therefore while decreeing the suit as regards item no   1  a  of the plaint. schedule properties dismissed the claim as regards items 1  b  and 2. on appeal by the appellants a bench of the jammu   kashmir high court agreeing. with the finding of the trial court and accepting the testimony of p w  1  the. advocate  and p w  2  the scribe of the will  found it to be genuine and. executed by mani ram  the appellate court also con  firmed the finding of the. trial court that the item l a  of the property is self acquired property of. mani ram while items l b  and 2 are the ancestral properties  while confirming. the decree of the trial court as regards item l a  it allowed the respondent s. claim regarding items 1  b  and 2 to the extent of one half share holding that. under section 27 of the jammu   kashmir  hindu succession. act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act hsa1956189    mani ram was. entitled to dispose of his interest in the joint family property by will. aggrieved by the decision of the bench of the jammu   kashmir high court the. appel  lants have preferred this appeal. though the concurrent finding of both the courts below is that the will was a. valid one and was executed by mani ram of his own free will and when possessed. against mani ram  the latter gave an undertaking not to alienate his. properties and taking into account the proceedings it is most unlikely that he. would have executed the will at time which it purports to be as he would have. mentioned about his execution of the will in the proceedings  we have examined. all these points very care  fully and we find that there is no substance in. any one of them. the plea that the will was executed after july  1959  when there was a. prohibition against the alienation and it was pre dated is without any. substance  the will is dated 25th may  1959  and a contemporaneous record of. the sub  stance of the will is made by p w  2 404 in one of his regularly kept. books  we see no need for predating of the will and the basis of the argument. that the will was not executed on the day on which it purports to be is. without substance. regarding the next contention that the will is an unnat  ural one it has to be. seen that the son had filed a suit for partition and in the written statement. the father had gone so far as to disown his paternity  it is common ground. that the relationship between mani ram and his son was greatly strained and it. is not surprising that he has disowned him  in unmistakable terms in the will. the submission that the will would not have been executed in mid 1959 is based. on the plea that he had made a statement in december  1959  that he had not. alienated any property  the son in the suit prayed for an order against mani. ram restraining him from alienating the joint family properties except with. the permission of the court  a consent order was passed di  recting mani ram. not to alienate joint family properties. there was no need for mani ram to mention about the will for it is not an. alienation and in any event the will ac  cording to mani ram did not relate to. joint family proper  ties  the nondisclosure of the execution of the will is. understandable because mani ram did not want anyone particu  larly his son to. know about his dispossessing of the proper  ty by will  this ground also is. without substance. the main ground of attack was that on the face of it  it is apparent that the. signature is not that of mani ram. the appellate court has found that mani ram was an illiter  ate person and. that he had no standard signature  his signature is not well formed  but his. signature in the vakalatnama and in the will bear striking  resemblance as. found by the bench of the high court  though there are certain dissimilarities. between the signature in the will and in those of admitted documents we are. unable to say that the signature in the will is not that of mani ram  in this. connection we have examined the evidence of the handwriting expert who gave. evidence on behalf of the appellants  we feel that his qualifications are not. such as to accept him as a handwriting expert  he has hardly done any work as. an expert after 1950 and we find in his deposition that he has exceeded the. limits as an expert and supported the appellants in matters which were not. within his province. we have no hesitation in agreeing with the high court and rejecting his. testimony  a comment was made on the fact that the date and endorsement in the. will is in a different ink and probably was not written at the same time  in. this connection a discrepancy in the evidence of the scribe  p w. 2  as to where actually the date was noted whether it was in his house or that. of the lawyer s was made much of  we do not think that this discrepancy would. affect the  truth of the matter  it is seen that p w  2 in his record entered. summary of the will on the same day  it is significant that in the cross. examination no question was asked challenging the genuineness  the entry with. regard to the will was made by p w  2 in the register which is a public. register and on examination we find there is nothing suspicious about it  it. 405 may also be noted that the first appellant  the son of mani ram  has not. stated that the signature found in the will is not that of his father  apart. from all these circumstances we find the evidence of p w  1 a respectable. advocate  who speaks of his advising in the preparation of the will  his. seeing the executant sign the will in his presence can be safely accepted. excepting that a statement which he made as a witness was rebutted by a. district judge nothing else has been suggested against him  we have no. hesitation in accepting the evidence of these two witnesses  as the two lower. courts have done  there is no ground at all for rejecting the evidence of p w. 2  the scribe  whose evidence has been accepted by both the courts  the scribe. had immediately noted the gist of the will in one of his regu  larly kept. records which has not been challenged  we have  therefore  no hesitation in. accepting the finding of the two lower courts that the will is a genuine one. and was execut  ed by mani ram of his own free will. error in holding that item 1  a  of the properties is the self acquired. property of mani ram. priest and at the same time was in the private office of the maharaja and was. also an a d c  of the maharaja and the maharaja used to give presents to him. it is in evidence that the maharaja had given  the land and himself. constructed the kothi before giving it to mani ram  in support of the. of rs  140 a month as an employee in the private department of the maharaja. thus he had ample means to acquire item 1  a  of the property from his self. acquisition  on the other hand there is hardly any evi  dence to prove that he. had any ancestral nucleus  it is stated that the family had some jewels and. cash which were kept in the safe of the maharaja and there is nothing to. indicate that any thing out of the cash or jewellery was used in purchasing. item 1  a  of the property  i was also contended that the property that. belonged to mani ram was only the house and not the land attached to the. house. we have no hesitation in rejecting this desperate plea  the result is we. confirm the findings of the courts below that item 1  a  of the property is. the self acquisition and the decree of the appellate court so far as item 1. a  is concerned is confirmed. regarding items 1  b  and 2 the appellate court has found that they are joint. family properties  it is admit  ted by both the parties that under section 27. of the jammu   kashmir  hindu succession act. 1956  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act hsa1956189    the. interest of the coparacener in a joint hindu family property can be disposed. of by will  section 27 provides that any hindu may dispose of by will any. property which is capable of being disposed by him in law  the explanation to. the section makes it clear that the interest of a male hindu in a mitak  shara. coparacenary property be deemed to be property capa  ble of being disposed of. by him within the meaning of the sub section  as the joint family consisted of. mani ram and his son  the first appellant  the appellate court gave a decree. in favour of the respondent so far as one half share of items 1  b  and 2 of. that the wife of the  father has a right to a share equal to that of the. father or the sons  in madras  though mitakshara law is applicable it has been. held that on a partition between the sons and the father  the mother is not. entitled to any share   mulla s hindu law  14th ed   p 403   madras state   in. southern india the practice of allotting shares upon partition to females has. long since become obsolete     so far as jammu   kashmir is concerned there is. no decisions regarding the interest of a male hindu in property  this question. as  to what is the interest of mani ram in the joint family property at the. time of his death was not  raised before the high court  in fact  the case. first appellant was that the joint family consisted of himself and his father. alone  though in the partition suit filed by him he claimed onethird share. con  ceding that his father and mother are entitled to the other two third. share  though the question was not raised in any of the courts below  we feel. that being a pure question of law  interests of justice require that the. question be decided  the high court will decide the interest which mani ram. had in the joint family property at the time of his death which he could. dispose of by his will  in remitting this question to the high court  we. decree he suit of the respondent in respect of item 1  a  one third share in. items 1  b  and 2 of the plaint schedule properties as to that extent her. share is not questioned  the question as to what is the extent of the interest. as regards items 1  b  and 2 of the plaint schedule properties which can be. bequeathed by mani ram in favour of the respondent is remitted to the high.

[Facts] allowing the writ petition  the court. held  under clauses 4 and 5 of article 22 of the constitution the detenu has a. dual right viz. i  to have the representation  irrespective of the length of detention. the judgment of the court was delivered by fazal ali  j  this writ petition. has been filed with a prayer that an order of detention passed against the. petitioner on the 7th 870 september  1979  under s  3 1  of the  conservation. of foreign exchange and prevention of smuggling activities act. 1974  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act cofeaposaa1974679   be. quashed  after the order was served on the detenu he made a representation on. the 27th september  1979 to the govt  who received it on the 28th september. 1979  in support of the rule mr  a  k  sen has raised a number of points  but. 1   to have the representation  irrespective of the length of detention.
[Ratio of the decision] considered by the appropriate government  and  ii  to have the representation. considered by the board duly constituted under the concerned act   870 e  f. further  the constitutional right to file a representation to the government. carries with it impliedly a right that the representation must be disposed of. as quickly as possible and any unexplained delay would amount to a violation. of constitutional guarantee contained in article 22 5    870 f g  the. obligation of the appropriate detaining authority to take a decision on the. representation filed by the detenu is quite apart and distinct from its. obligation to constitute a board and to send the representation to it  the. detaining authority is not entitled to wait for the opinion of the board but. deciding the representation and that the detention is therefore vitiated  we. need not go into the other points  on the question of delay the petitioner had. expressly taken a plea in para 11 of the petition but in their reply the. respondents have not at all explained or detailed any reason why there was. inordinate delay in disposing of the representation submitted by the detenu to. the detaining authority  the admitted position is that the representation was. received by the government on the 28th september  1979 and it was rejected on. 3rd november  1979  that is to say  after about one month and five days of the. receipt  it is now well settled that any unexplained delay in deciding the. representation filed by the detenu amounts to a clear violation of art  22 5. of the constitution of india and is sufficient to vitiate the detention  our. attention was drawn by the counsel for the petitioner to a recent decision of. considered by the appropriate government  and. 2   to have the representation considered by the board duly constituted under. the concerned act. representation to the government carries with it impliedly a right that the. representation must be disposed of as quickly as possible and any unexplained. delay would amount to a violation of the constitutional guarantee contained in. art  22  5   this court has also pointed out that the obligation of the. appropriate detaining authority to take a decision on the representation filed. by the detenu is quite apart 871 and distinct from its obligation to. constitute a board and to send the representation to it  the detaining. authority is not entitled to wait for the opinion of the board but has to take. its decision without the least possible delay  in writ petition no  246 of. 1969 decided on september 10  1969 this court observed as follows. it is implicit in the language of art  22 that the appropriate government. while discharging its duty to consider the representation  cannot depend upon. the views of the board on such representation  it has to consider the. representation on its own without being influenced by any such view of the. board  there was  therefore  no reason for the government to wait for. considering the petitioner s representation until it had received the report. of the advisory board  as laid down in sk  abdul karim   ors  v  state of west. bengal   supra  the obligation of the appropriate government under art  22 5. is to consider the representation made by the detenu as expeditiously as. possible  the consideration by the government of such representation has to. be  as aforesaid independent of any opinion which may be expressed by the. advisory board. the fact that art  22 5  enjoins upon the detaining authority to afford to the. detenu the earliest opportunity to make a representation must implicitly mean. that such representation must  when made  considered and disposed of as. expeditiously as possible  otherwise  it is obvious that the obligation to. furnish the earliest opportunity to make a representation loses both its. purpose and meaning   the observations extracted above clearly show that the. representation must be considered by the government as expeditiously as. possible  mr  lalit submitted that the delay in deciding the representation. was due to the fact that the representation had to pass through various. channels and departments before the government was in a position to decide it. in the first place no such facts have been pleaded in the reply filed by the. respondents and  therefore  we cannot entertain the grounds now urged by the. counsel for the union for the first time in the arguments before us  even so. it appears that at the most the detaining authority had forwarded the. representation to the revenue intelligence whose comments were received on. 16 10 79. thereafter there was absolutely no justification for any delay in taking a. decision on the merit of the representation  even if we assume that there was. some reasonable explanation for the delay from 28th september  1979 to 16th. octo  872 ber  1979  there appears to be no good explanation whatsoever for. the delay from 16th october  1979 to 2nd november  1979 when the. representation was rejected by the government  it is manifest that the. government was not obliged to wait for the decision of the board because it. had to consider the representation independently of what the board might say. in this view of the matter  we are satisfied that there has been unreasonable. delay in deciding the representation filed by the detenu and that by itself is. sufficient to render the detention void  for these reasons we allow this.

[Facts] special leave granted  delay of six days is condoned  the short question for. sales tax act  1948 by providing for imposition of sales tax on  beltings of. dated 14 12 1957 and no  4064 x 960 4  58 dated 25 11  1958 where  by  cotton. fabrics of all kinds  were exempted from the imposition of sales tax under the. act  thereafter on 1st of december 1973 a notification was issued by the. fabrics in item no  18 of the schedule inserted by section 4 of the said act.
[Ratio of the decision] it  patta as an item of cotton fabric stood exempted from tax liability. subsequently  another notification was issued on december 1  1973 under. empowers the state government to modify the rate of tax by notifica  tion. this notification of 1973 was issued without withdraw  ing the earlier. notification of 1958. the high court  affirming the order of the tribunal  held that in the absence. of a notification withdrawing the earlier notification of 1958  sales tax. would not be exigi  ble in terms of the notification of 1973. allowing the appeal. held   per majority pathak  cji and ranganath misra  j   ray  j  dissenting. 1   the high court was not justified in holding that in the absence of a. notification withdrawing the earlier noti  fication of 1958  sales tax would. not be exigible in terms of the notification of 1973  the order of the. tribunal  which has been affirmed by the high court  is set aside and the. assessment restored   96g. 2   the notification of 1958 issued under section 4 of the act exempted. cotton fabrics of all varieties  from sales tax  the notification of 1973. under section 3 a of the act prescribed sales tax of 7  on the sale of. beltings of all kinds  there is no dispute that patta is a kind of 94 belting. material and  on being treated as cotton fabric  was exempted from sales tax. 95fg. subse  quent notification under section 3 a prescribes the rate of tax  the. intention is to withdraw the exemption and make the sale liable to tax at the. rate prescribed in the notifica  tion   96b d. 4   as the power both for the grant of exemption and the variation of the rate. of tax vests in the state government and it is not the requirement of the. statute that a notifi  cation of recall of exemption is a condition precedent. both for withdrawal of exemption and also for providing higher tax   96d e. 5   the exemption was in regard to a class of goods and while the exemption. view of the matter  that it will be excisable to sales tax on the basis of the. notification dated december 1  1973 under section 3 a of the said act  by the. govern  ment  i98f  g h. 2   so long as the general exemption granted under sec  tion 4 with regard to. cotton fabrics of all kinds  contin  ues  no sales tax can be imposed on. beltings of all kinds which fail within the  cotton fabrics of all kinds  and. the general exemption under section 4 will prevail over the notification made. under section 3 a of the sales tax act. consideration in this appeal at the instance of the revenue is whether the. high court was justified in holding that in the absence of a notification. tax  it is not disputed that under it sale of patta  the goods in question on. being treated as cotton fabric was exempted from sales tax  the notification. of 1973 made under section 3a of the act prescribed sales tax of seven per. cent on the sale of beltings of all kinds. there is no dispute now that patta is a kind of belting material. section 3 of the act contains the charging provision and prescribes a uniform. rate of tax on sales  section 3a empow  ers the state government to modify the. rate of tax by noti  fication  the notification of 1973 in fact prescribes a. rate of tax higher than provided by section 3  in 1958  under the notification. referred to above  patta as an item of cotton fabric stood exempted from tax. liability  the high court has 96 referred to some of its earlier decisions and. has concluded thus. thus the consistent view of this court throughout has been that by issuing a. separate notification under section 3a  the earlier exemption granted under. section 4 of the act cannot be negatived  if the state wanted to tax  beltings. taxing scheme incorporated in the act and the power both under sections 3a as. also under section 4 is exercisable by the state government only. subsequent notification under section 3a prescribes the rate of tax  it is. beyond doubt that the intention is to withdraw the exemption and make the sale. liable to tax at the rate prescribed in the notification  as the power both. for the grant of exemption and the variation of the rate of tax vests in the. state government and it is not the requirement of the statute that a. notification of recall of exemption is a condition precedent to imposing tax. at any prescribed rate by a valid notification under section 3a  we see no. force in the contention of the assessee which has been upheld by the high. court  in fact  the second notification can easily be treated as a combined. notifica  tion  both for withdrawal of exemption and also for provid  ing. higher tax  when power for both the operations vests in the state and the. intention to levy the tax is clear we see no justification for not giving. effect to the 2nd notifica  tion  we would like to point out that the. exemption was in regard to a class of goods and while the exemption continues. a specific item has now been notified under section 3a of the act. the high court is set aside and the assessment is restored  parties are. directed to bear their respective costs throughout. b c  ray  j  i have had the privilege of going through the judgment rendered. by my learned brother but i am unable to concur with the reasonings recorded. by my learned brother in his judgment so far as it relates to the scope and. effect of the notification dated 1 12 1973 made under section 3a of the u p. in item no  8  beltings of all kinds  for imposi  tion of sales tax  the sole. question arising in this appeal is whether beltings of all kinds are excisable. to sales tax by virtue of the notification dated 1 12  1973 even though they. fall within  cotton fabrics of all kinds  which are exempted from tax by. must be interpreted according to its popular sense  meaning  that sense which. that the product falls within the exempted item rayon or artificial silk. in the instant case the question arising for considera  tion is whether patta. covered by  cotton fabrics of all varieties  is excisable to sales tax under. the notification dated 1 12  1973 namely  beltings of all kinds   in view of. the decisions referred to hereinbefore cotton beltings fall within the. textiles of all varieties as notified under section 4 of the said act being. exempt from the imposition of sales tax  the question that falls for. consideration is what is the effect of the notification issued under section. 3 a of the said act on 1 12  1973 mentioned in the schedule  beltings of all. kinds   there is no dispute nor any chal  lenge that these beltings are cotton. beltings falling within cotton fabrics of all kinds and as there is a general. exemp  tion granted by the notification issued in 1957 and 1958 exempting. cotton fabrics of all kinds   it is not possible to hold in any view of the. matter that it will be excisable to sales tax on the basis of the notification. dated 1 12 1973 under section 3 a of the said act  by the govern  ment. the next question for consideration is what is the effect of a 99 notification. under section 3 a including an item in the schedule for imposition of sales. tax though there is a general exemption from sales tax under section 4 of the. fiscal statute like the one before me has to be interpreted strictly  if there. is any ambiguity or doubt it should be resolved in favour of the subject. there is no equity about tax  the taxing liability must be express and. absolute  in the present case  the specification of the goods for purpose of. section 3 a is one thing  but whether or not such goods would be exempted from. tax is the power conferred upon the state government under section 4 of the. act  so long the exemption continues  the dealer can cer  tainly urge and with. jurtisification that the mere specifi  cation of goods under section 3 a or. declaring the point of sales at such turnover liable to tax would not take. away the exemption from payment of tax which the goods enjoyed by virtue of. the exercise of power by the state government under section 4 of the act  the. operating fields of the two sections namely sections 3 a by itself cannot. override the power under section 4  on the other hand  if certain goods have. been classified for purposes of by the state govern  ment  if such goods had. been exempted from sales  the de  partment cannot contend that the exemption. should not be construed in favour of the assessee   in this case the question. arose whether the general exemption granted under section 4 of the act in. respect of milk and milk products is sufficient to exempt kulfi and lassi in. respect of which a separate notification was issued under section 3 a for. imposition of tax. long as the general exemption under section 4 continues a particular item. noti  fied under section 3 a of the sales tax act cannot be taxed.

[Facts] years to the highest bidder from amongst the six partners. in july  1948   a  transferred his 1 6th share to the appel  lant for. rs 4 50 000  the appellant had taken a loan against shares of that value held. by him in another sugar mill for purchase of the share  in may  1950  another. partner  b  leased out his 1 6th share to the appellant on an annual payment. of rs 50 000  in july  1950 yet another partner  c  leased out his 1 6th share. to the appellant for a similar sum  in 1951  c  sued for cancellation of the. lease  in april  1954 the dispute was compromised and the lease termi  nated. c  undertook to pay the appellant at the rate of rs. 16 000 for the first three years and at the rate of rs. i0 000 for the subsequent two years   b s 1 6th share was also returned on. mutual arrangement and he agreed to pay the appellant a sum of rs 39 000 and. during the assessment proceedings for the year 1953 54 the nature of these. receipts came to be considered  the assessee appellant maintained that these. were in the nature of capital receipts in lieu of the lease hold interest  the. rent received by him from the receiver in the assessment year 1954 55  since. the sugar mill was being assessed as an association of persons  for the. assessment year 1960 61 102 the receiver claimed that for the purpose of. computing depreciation allowance  the written down value of the busi  ness. assets be enhanced so as to reflect the sum of rs 4 50 000 in place of 16th. share representing the share of  a   the revenue negatived the assessee s. contentions  which view was upheld by the high court. dismissing the appeals by certificate  the court. held  1  the amounts the assessee received under the compromise or by amicable. arrangement from other partners were in the nature of profits to be received. by the assessee for the interest held in the business and  therefore  con. stituted taxable income   106b. the judgment of the court was delivered by ranganath misra  j  ca  no  850 of. 1973 this appeal is by certificate and is directed against the judgment of the. high court of allahabad  assessee and five of his brothers constituted a hindu. joint family  the relevant assessment year is 1953 54 corresponding to the. accounting period ending on 30th june  1952  the joint family which owned. inter alia a sugar factory at bijnore  in 1930 there was partition in the. family and the members of the erstwhile joint family constituted themselves. into a partnership firm which took over the sugar factory and operated the. same  in the year  1944  sheo prasad  one of the brothers who was a partner of. the firm instituted a suit in the lahore high court for dissolution of the. firm  partition of the country followed and after the parties shifted over to. india a fresh suit was instituted at bijnore for purposes of partition. the properties were put in charge of a receiver appointed by the court  so far. as the sugar factory is concerned  the arrangement was that at five yearly. rest an auction was to be held confined to the partners and the highest bidder. would be given lease to operate the factory for that period under the. receiver  on 16th july  1948  sheo prasad trans  ferred his 1 6th share to. banarsi dass at a stated valuation of rs 4 50 000  on 3rd may  1950  another. brother  devi chand  leased out his 1 6th share to banarsi dass on an annual. payment of rs 50 000  on 13th july  1950  yet another brother  kanshi ram. similarly leased out his 1 6th share to banarsi dass for a similar sum  in. 1951  kanshi ram sued for cancellation of the lease  on 6th april  1954  the. dispute was compromised and the lease was 104 terminated  kanshi ram undertook. to pay to banarsi dass at the rate of rs  16 000 for the first three years and. share was also returned on mutual arrangement and he agreed to pay a sum of. rs 39 000 and odd annually to banarsi dass for the lease period  during the. assessment proceedings  the nature of these receipts came to be debat  ed the. assessee maintained that these were in the nature of capital receipt lieu of. the lease hold interest and the income tax officer maintained that those were. revenue re  ceipts  in due course  the tribunal ultimately upheld the view of. the revenue. one more question that arose was the admissibility of a claim of expenditure. being payment of interest on a loan taken for purchase of shares in the sugar. factory  the income tax officer had allowed the claim of rs 75 211  the. appellate assistant commissioner gave notice to the assessee and disallowed. the same  the appellate tribunal reversed the finding of the appellate. assistant commissioner in regard to the admissibility of the claim  thus the. assessee as also the revenue applied to the tribunal to refer the case to the. high court  as far as relevant  the following questions were referred for the. opinion of the high court under section 66 1  of the act at the instance of. the assessee. 1   whether on the facts and in the circum  stances of the case  the sums of. rs  16 000 and rs 39 262 received from kanshi ram and devi chand respectively. were assessable as income of the assessee. concerned  the high court referred to the arrangement entered into by the. the total sum of rs 68 000 constituted an assessable receipt  on the same. reasoning  the high court held that the amount of rs 39 262 received from devi. lord krishna sugar mills valued at rs 4 50 000  in this assessment year  the. receiver claimed that for the purposes of computing the depreciation. allowance  the written down value of the busi  ness assets be enhanced so as. to reflect the sum of rs 4 50 000 in place of 1 6th share representing the. share of 108 sheo prasad  similar claim had been raised by banarsi dass in his. own assessment  the income tax officer rejected the claim and such rejection.
[Ratio of the decision] odd annually. assessee also claimed depreciation on the 1 6th share in the sugar mill that. he had acquired from  a   similar questions also arose for the assessment. years 1954 55 and 1955 56  the assessee had suffered a loss in the sugar. business in the assessment year 1953 54  a part of which remained unab. sorbed  and claimed set off of that unabsorbed loss against the share of the. 2   the benefit of s  10 2  vi  of the income tax act  1922 would be. admissible only where the assessee is the owner of the property  it too is not. admissible in respect of a fractional claim   106a  in the instant case  all. that is claimed for the asses  see is 1 6th share in the machinery  such a. fractional share does not suffice for granting an allowance for depreciation. before the claim for set off of carried forward loss could be admitted. firstly  the income against which the loss has to be set off should be income. from business and secondly  the business should be same in which the loss was. suffered   107c  in the instant case  the letting out of the sugar mill was. not the business of the assessee  the receiver was appointed for dissolution. of the firm and the main reason for allowing the sugar factory to work was to. dispose it of as a running mill so that proper price could be fetched. 107de. 4   under the scheme of 1922 act  it is the assessee who alone is entitled to. maintain claim of depreciation  within the framework of that scheme it is. difficult to maintain separate value of a part of the asset to work out. deprecia  tion  the book value  as shown must in the instant case  therefore. be applicable to the entire assets of the firm including the 1 6th share which. a  had given to the appel  lant  the claim of the receiver for depreciation. cannot  therefore  be sustained   108b  103. civil appellate jurisdiction  civil appeal nos  850 of 1973 etc. from the judgment and order dated 3 9  1970 of the allahabad high court in. civil miscellaneous  itr  no  461 of 1961. with civil appeal no  941 of 1975. from the judgment and order dated 5 5  1972 of the allahabad high court in. i t  reference no  236 of 1969. raja ram agarwal and mrs  rani chhabra for the appellants. b b  ahuja and ms  a subhashini for the respondents. 2   whether on the facts and in the circum  stances of the case  depreciation. is allowable on the 1 6th share in s b  sugar mills  bij  nore which the. assessee had acquired from seth sheo prasad  so far as the first question is. parties as also the terms of compromise and referred to certain deci  sions. and came to the conclusion that the sum of rs  16 000 received as a part of. chand was also liable to tax. so far as the other question is concerned  the high court held    the. question  however  remains whether the assessee is 105 entitled to claim. depreciation on the ground that it has acquired 1 6th share in the s b. sugar mills  it is to be noted that the asses  see does not claim to be full. owner of the property  all that the assessee claims is 1 6th share in s b. in respect of depreciation of such buildings  machinery  plant or furniture. being the property of the assessee              in order to qualify for an. allowance under clause  vi   the assessee has to make out that the building. machinery  plant or furniture is the property of the assessee  mr  shanti. bhushan appearing for the assessee urged that clause  vi  is attracted even. where an asses  see owns a fractional share in the machinery. vi   the point is not free from difficulty   the high court ultimately came. to hold. in order to qualify for an allowance under clause  vi   the claimant must. make out that the machinery is the property of the assessee. that test is not satisfied by the present assessee  the assessee does not. claim to be the full owner of the machinery in question. all that is claimed for the assessee is 1 6th share in the machinery  such a. fractional share will not suffice for granting an allow  ance for depreciation. under section 10 2  vi  of the act   we have heard learned counsel for the. assessee appellant at length  he has referred to several authorities in. support of the assessee s stand of admissibility of the claim  on both scores. according to him  the proper test to be adopted should have been to find out. whether the arrangement consti  tuted an apparatus to earn profit  whether the. arrangement was one in course of business activity  and whether what was. received constituted a part of the circulating capital or was a part of the. fixed asset  we have considered the sub  missions of 106 the learned counsel. for the appellant but are not in a position to accept the same  there is. hardly scope to doubt that the benefit of section 10 2  vi  of the act would. be admissible only where the assessee is the owner of the property  it too is. not admissible in respect of a fraction  al claim  similarly  we are of the. view  in agreement with the high court  that the amounts which the assessee. received under the compromise or by amicable arrangement was in the nature of. profits to be received by the assessee for the interest held in the business. granted by the allahabad high court and relates to the assessment year 1955 56. namely  as to whether one of the instalments received by the assessee out of. the said amount of rs 68 000  as referred to above  in respect of an earlier. assessment year constituted a taxable receipt  the second question relates to. acquisition of the 1 6th share under a deed of exchange from devi chand under. the exchange deed dated 16th july  1948  which indicated that the valuation of. that interest was shown to be rs 4 50 000 and depreciation was claimed in. regard to it  both the questions raised here are covered by our aforesaid. judgment  the appeal of the assessee has therefore to fail  the appeal is. c a  no  1101 of 1975. the relevant assessment year in this case is 1954 55 corresponding to the. accounting period ending june 30  1953. three questions survive for consideration  one relating to the receipt of rs. 16 000 and rs 42 957 in the same manner as already indicated  and the other. depreciation in regard to the 1 6th share  said to have been valued at. rs 4 50 000. both the questions have to be answered against the assessee for the reasons. already indicated  in this case  there is a third question which is relevant. namely  whether in the facts and circumstances of the case  the unabsorbed. carried forward loss of rs 78 084 was liable to be set off against the share. of the rent received by the assessee from the receiver  dealing with this. question  the high court ob  served. 107  during the previous year relevant to the assessment year 1953 54  the. assessee had suffered a loss in sugar business  after setting off the loss. against other heads of income there remained an unabsorbed loss of rs 78 084. in the assessment year in dispute the assessee claimed that the unabsorbed. loss of the preceding year should be brought for  ward and set off against its. share in lease money received from the receiver in respect of s b  sugar. mills  this claim of the assessee has been disallowed and the question arises. as to whether the assessee was entitled to carry forward and set off the loss. as claimed by it   the high court referred to section 24 of the income tax act. of 1922 and indicated that two conditions had to be ful  filled before the. claim of set off of carried forward loss could be admitted  firstly  the. income against which the loss has to be set off should be income from business. and secondly  the business should be same in which the loss was suffered  the. high court referred to certain decisions including the one of this court in. 26 itr 765   cgi bin lawcite cit 26 20itr 20765  and ultimately negatived the. claim of the assessee by saying that the question would not arise because the. letting out of the sugar mill was not the business of the assessee  in fact. the receiver was appointed for dissolution of the firm and the main reason  as. found by the high court  for allowing the sugar factory to work was to dispose. it of as a running mill so that proper price would be fetched  having heard. learned counsel for the parties  we are satisfied that there is no merit in. the assessee s stand and the same has got to be dismissed  the appeal is. accordingly dismissed  parties are directed to bear their own costs. throughout. c a  no  941 of 1975 this appeal is by certificate from the judgment of the. allahabad high court  the assessee is the sugar mill which during the relevant. assessment year 1960 61 corresponding to the accounting period ending 30th. june  1959  was in the hands of a court receiver  the sugar mill was being. assessed as an association of persons  banarsi dass  a partner  had 1 6th. share therein  he had acquired under a deed of ex  change dated 16th july. 1948 1 6th share of sheo prasad in exchange of shares held by banarsi dass in. has been upheld throughout  we have already turned down the claim of banarsi. dass  this claim has  therefore  to be rejected  we may additionally point out. that under the scheme of the act  it is the assessee who alone is entitled to. maintain such claim of depreciation and it would indeed be difficult  within. the framework of the scheme contained in the statute  to maintain a separate. value of the part of the asset to work out depreciation  the book value as. shown must be applicable to the entire assets of the firm including the 1 6th. share which sheo prasad had given to banarsi dass  the claim has rightly been. p s s  appeals dis  missed.

[Facts] rajasthan imposition of ceiling on agricultural holdin gs act  1973  sections. 3  4 1   15 2  and 40 1   ceili ng area  determination of  repeal of chapter. were introduc ed into the act by the rajasthan tenancy  amendment  act  196 0. the notified date under the 1955 act was 153 1 4 1966  subsequentiy  on. 1 1 1973  by the rajasthan imp o  sition of ceiling on agricultural holdings. ordinance  197 3  these provisions were repealed  except to the extent ind i. cated in the second proviso to s  4 1  and s  15 2  of t he ordinance  certain. transfers made by the landholders  ev en during the operation of the old law. were recognised as valid transfers for the purpose of computation of ceili ng. area under the new dispensation brought about by the ord i  nance  the. ordinance was replaced by the 1973 act wi th retrospective effect from. ceiling areas  under chapter iii b of t he 1955 act came to be initiated and. were sought to be conti n  ued under the repealed chapter iii b against the. appellan ts including the appellants in c a  no  1003 n  of 1977 w ho claimed. to have entered into possession and cultivation of certain parcels of land. pursuant to agreements to se ll dated 28 4 1957  said to have been executed. in their favo ur by the then land holder  the sale deeds in this case we re. passed on 22 8 1966  after the notified date  proceedin gs for the fixation of. ceiling area in the hands of the th en land holder were commenced under the. repealed chapter ii ib of the 1955 act  and the purchases in question were. held to be hit by s  3odd of the repealed chapter iii b  as appe l  lants did. not possess the residential qualifications  pr e  scribed by the section for. the eligibility for recogniti on of such transfers. the appellants approached the high court  contendi ng that after the coming. into force of the 1973 act which by s. 40  repealed chapter iii b of the 1955 act  recourse cou ld not be had to the. repealed law for purposes of commencemen t  conduct and conclusion of any. proceedings for fixation of ceiling as prescribed under the old law. rejecting the contention of the appellants  the hi gh court held that the new. act of 1973 did not have the swee p  ing effect of destroying all the rights. accrued and liabil i  ties incurred under the old act. court. the judgment of the court was delivered by venkatachaliah  j  these appeals. by special leave a nd petitions for grant of special leave pertaining to. agrari an reform legislation in the state of rajasthan  arise out of and are. directed against the judgment dated 21st octobe r  1976  of a full bench of. the high court of rajasthan  di s  missing a batch of special appeals and. affirming the jud g  ment dated 2 12 1975 of the learned single judge of the. hi gh court rejecting appellants contentions against the legali ty of certain. proceedings for the fixation of ceiling on agr i  cultural holdings initiated. and continued under the prov i  sions of chapter iii b of the rajasthan. tenancy act  195 5. in the writ petition filed directly in this court relie fs similar to those. niceties and embellishments  w as whether the proceedings for fixation of. ceiling area wi th reference to the appointed dated i e  1 4 1966 under chapt. er iii b of the rajasthan tenancy act  1955  157   1955 act  for short  could. be initiated and continu ed after the coming into force of the rajasthan. imposition of ceiling on agricultural holdings act  act no  11 of 197 3. holdings  in the state of rajasthan  was intr o  duced into the  1955 act  by. the rajasthan tenancy  amen d  ment  act  1960  as a sequential necessity. ceiling area   the notified date  as original ly fixed  was 1 4 1965  but. owing to the uncertainties impart ed to the implementation of the law by the. challenge made to the provisions of chapter iii b before the high court a nd. the interim orders of the high court staying the operati on of the law. government had had to re notify 1 4 1966 as t he fresh notified date  after. the challenge to the validity of chapter iii b had been repelled by the high. court. by the time  the  1973 act  was brought into for ce disputes touching the. aft er the  1973 act  came into force on 1 1  1973  some 8 4 94 cases for the. be en repelled by the full bench of the high court in the judgme nt under. appeal  the correctness of view of the full ben ch arises for consideration in. these appeals. 3   the factual antecedents in which the controver sy arose before the high. court may be illustrated by the fac ts of one of the appeals  in ca 1003 n  of. 1977  the appe l  lants  claim to have entered into possession and cultivati. on of certain parcels of land pursuant to alleged agreements to sell dated. 28 4 1957 said to have been executed in the ir favour by the then land holder. a certain sri hari sing h. the sale deeds were passed only on 22 8 1966  after t he notified date. singh were commenced under the repealed chapter iii  b of the  1955 act. appellants  pruchases were held to be h it by section 30 dd of the said. force of the  1973 act   no proceedings und er the old law could be initiated. children bei ng dependent on them and the widowed mother of the husband so. dependent  and  b   person  in the case of an individual  sha ll include the. family of such individual   section 30c providing for the extent of ceiling. area said. 160  30c  extent of ceiling area   the ceiling area for a family consisting of. relation thereto shall be i n  creased for each additional member by five. tenancy  fixation of ceiling of land  government rule s  1963  which came into. force on and with effect fr om 15 12 1963  rule 9 required that in order to. enable t he sub divisional officer to determine the ceiling area a p  plicable. months from the notified date  the law fixed 30 standa rd acres as the ceiling. area  thereafter  successive amendmen ts were made to chapter iii b of the. 1955 act  which  whi le maintaining the ceiling at 30 standard acres  howeve. challenge to 161 said inclusion was repelled by this court. 7   on 1 1 1973  the governor of the state of rajasth an promulgated the. rajasthan imposition of ceiling on agrilcu l  tural holdings ordinance  1973. under article 213 of t he constitution of india  the ordinance repealed the. extent indicated in the seco nd proviso to section 4 1  and section 15 2  of. the said ord i  nance  the ordinance brought into existence a new concept of. and standards for the  ceilingarea   certain transfers ma de by the land. holders even during the operation of the old l aw were recognised as valid. transfers for purposes of comput a  tion of ceiling area under the new. dispensation broug ht about by the ordinance  this ordinance was replaced by t. he 1973 act which was made operative retrospectively fr om 1 1 1973 being the. the surplus land to landle ss persons  and  vii  the amount to be paid to the. land holde rs for the excess land vesting in the state under the new law. it was submitted that the two laws  the old and t he new envisaged two totally. 3 of 1973 act as detracting from t he tenability of the conclusion reached by. on the appoint ed day  if 171 any person has at any time after the fourth day. of augus t  1959  but before the appointed day held any land  includi ng any. exempted land  in excess of the ceiling area  su ch person should file a.
[Ratio of the decision] the r e  pealed provisions  even after coming into effect of raja s  than. imposition of ceiling on agricultural holdings ac t  1973  state s right to. excess land and land owner s liabil i  ty to surrender surplus land  on the. appointed day  wheth er a right accrued and liability incurred within the. meaning of clause  c  and  e  ors  6 of rajasthan general claus es act. whether affected by repeal  sec  6 of rajasthan gener al clauses act  whether. attracted  whether s  3 of 1973 act h as overriding effect as to exclude. operation of the 1955 act. es as on notified date should be decided under old law  wheth er rights. accrued and liabilities incurred under the old l aw affected  whether new law. has overriding effect over the o ld one. chapter iii b of the rajasthan tenancy act  1955 pr e  scribing a ceiling on. holdings of agricultural lands  a nd cl  6a  of s  5  defining  ceiling area. the correctness of the view of the high court  w as challenged in the appeals. before this court  some other wr it petitions were also filed directly in this. court. on the questions whether  a  the scheme contemplated by the 1973 act and the. different criteria and standards f or the determination of ceiling area. envisaged in it and  in particular  having regard to the 154 limited scope of. the saving provision of s  40 which  qui te significantly  omitted to invoke. the pendi ng cases which had not been concluded under the old law befo re the. repeal  and  b  even if s  6 of the rajasthan gener al clauses act 1955 was. attracted and the old law was saved f or the purpose  provisions of the old. law could not be invok ed as no right had been  accrued  in favour of the. state in relation to the surplus area determinable under the old l aw nor any. liability incurred by the land holders under the o ld law so as to support the. initiation of the proceedings f or fixation of ceiling area under the old law. after its repea l. dismissing the appeals  special leave petitions and wr it petitions  this. law for the time being in force  d id not take within its sweep a law  deemed. to be in force  an d  therefore  the opening words of s  3 of 1973 act would n. ot have an overriding effect so as to exclude the old la w. 1955  the  right  must be  accrued  a nd not merely an inchoate one  the. distinction between what is and what is not a right preserved by s  6 of the. gener al  clauses act is often one of great fineness  what is una f  fected by. the repeal is a right  acquired  or  accrue d  under the repealed statute and. not  a mere hope or expect a  tion  of acquiring a right or liberty to apply. for a righ t. 168e. 3 2 the right of the state to the excess land was n ot merely an inchoate. right under the rajasthan tenancy ac t  1955  but a right  accrued  within the. rights and obligations under s  30e of the 1955 a ct had had to be determined. with reference to the notified da te i e  1 4 1966  the right of the state  to. sought before the high court are claimed. the principal controversy before high court in t he proceedings  shorn of its. determination of the ceiling areas in 33 471 cases had come to be decided in. accordance with t he provisions of chapter iii b of the earlier  1955 act. determination of  ceiling areas  under iii  b of the  1955 act  came to be. initiated and were sought to be continued under said chapter iii b of the. repealed  19 55 act  on the view that the repeal of chapter iii b of t he 1955. act by the 1973 act  did not affect the rights accru ed and liabilities. incurred under the old law  appellant s  principal contention is that after. the coming into force of the 1973 act which  by its 40th section  repealed. chapt er iii b of the   1955 act   recourse could not be had to t he repealed. law for purposes of commencement  conduct a nd conclusion of any proceedings. for fixation of ceiling as prescribed under the old law  this contention has. chapter iii b  which prescrib ed certain residential qualifications  which. appellants did n ot possess  for the eligibility for recognition of such tran. impermissible  apa rt from the facts of individual cases and their. particulariti es the basic question is one of construction whether the prov i. sions of the old law are saved and survive to govern pendi ng cases. 4   we have heard sri a k  sen  sri tarkunde and s ri shanti bhushan  learned. or continued. 5   the points that fall for consideration in the se appeals are whether. manifest an inte n  tion contrary to and inconsistent with the keeping alive. or saving of the repealed law so as to be invoked in relati on to and applied. for the pending cases which had not be en concluded under the old law before. the repeal  and  b  that  at all events  even if section 6 of the rajasth an. general clauses act 1955 was attracted and the old law w as saved for the. purpose  provisions of the old law could n ot be invoked as no right had been. accrued  in favour of 159 the state in relation to the surplus area. determinable und er the old law nor any liability  incurred  by the land holde. rs under the old law so as to support the initiation of t he proceedings for. fixation of  ceiling area  under the old l aw after its repeal. 6   re  contentions  a  in order that this contention  which is presented wi. th some perspicuity  is apprehended in its proper prospective a conspectus of. the essential provisions of the earlier l aw and later law pertaining to. prescription of ceiling on agricultural holdings is necessary. in 1955  the rajasthan tenancy act 1955 was enacted. by the rajasthan tenancy  amendment  act  for the first tim e  provisions in. presidential asse nt on 12th march 1960  the chapter iii b was  by an. appropria te notification  brought into force with effect from 15 th december. other prescribed partic u  lars  is found in the prescribed manner to be. irrigated  barani  land   in exercise of the rule making powers under the. 1955 act    the state government framed and promulgated the rajasth an. originally so recognised in fixing the ceiling  aga in  by an amendment  of. the year 1970  section 30  1  w as deleted  the 1955 act itself came to be. included in the ix schedule to the constitution by a parliamentary law  t he. corr e  sponding provisions relating to ceiling on agricultur al holdings. contained in section 5 6a  and chapter iii b of t he  1955 act  except to the. a nd the question as to the extent to which the repealed law is saved would be. dependent upon the express provisions of t he later statute or what must be. held to be its necessary a nd completing implications  it was urged that where. the repe al is accompanied by a afresh legislation on the same subjec t  the. new law alone will determine if  and how far  the o ld law is saved and that. in the absence of an express appeal to section 6 of the general clauses act or. of express prov i  sions to similar effect in the new law itself  the prov i. sions of the old law must be held to have been effac ed except whatever had. been done  or having effect as if don e. this argument has the familiar ring of what sulaiman  c j. all  3  but it 163 must now be taken to be settled that the mere absence of an. express reference to section 6 of the general clauses act is not conclusive. unless such omission to invoke section 6 of the general clauses act is. attended with the circumstan ce that the provisions of the new law evince and. make manife st an intention contrary to what would  otherwise  follow by the. operation of section 6 of the general clauses act  t he incidents and. consequences of section 6 would follow. acres prescribed in the old law to 18 stan d  ard acres   ii  the re. definition of the very concept of  family  and  separate unit    iii  the. as submitted  envisage and provide an integrated and inte r  connected set of. provisions and the marked distinctions in the vital provisions in the two sets. of laws rendered t he continued applicability of the old law to any case  n ot. was a clinching indic a  tor in this behalf when it provided that the. provisions of the later law  shall have effect notwithstanding anythi ng. inconsistent contained in any other law for the time bei ng in force  or any. custom  usage  or contract or decree or order of a court or other authority. the same subject  the provisions of the new enactment would have to be looked. into not for t he purpose of ascertaining whether the consequences envisag ed. by sec  6 of the general clauses act ensued or not  sec. 6 would indeed be attracted unless the new legislation man i  fests a contrary. intention  but only for the purpose of determining whether the provisions in. the new statute ind i  cate a different intention  referring to the way in whi. ch such incompatibility with the preservation of old rights a nd liabilities. statute is actually repealed. addressing itself to the question whether  having rega rd to the particular. provisions of the 1973 act  the inferen ce that the new law manifests such. contrary intention cou ld justifiably be drawn  the high court observed. we have  therefore  to examine whether the n ew law expressly or otherwise. manifests an intention to wi pe out or sweep away those rights and liabilities. which h ad accrued and incurred under the old law           having carefully. gone through all the authoriti es cited by the parties as referred to above. we are of opini on that the new act of 1973 does not have the sweeping effe ct. of destroying all the rights accrued and liabilities i n  curred under the old. law. 10   one of the indicia that the old law was not effac ed is in sec  15 2  of. the new act  it provides that if t he state government was satisfied that the. ceiling area  in relation to a person as fixed under the old law had be en. determined in contravention of that law  a decided ca se could be re opened. and inquired into it and the  ceilin g  area  and the  surplus area. determined afresh in accordan ce with the provisions of the old law  another. indicium is in sec  40 1  read with the second proviso to sec  4 1  o f  1973. act  which provides that if the ceiling area applicab le to a person or a. family in accordance with the said se c. 4 1  exceeds the  ceiling area  applicable to such perso ns or family  under. the old law  then  the  ceiling are a  applicable to such person or family. would be the same as w as provided under the provisions of the old law. the high court relied upon and drew sustenance for i ts conclusion from  what. it called  the internal evidence in the act which  according to the high. court  indicated th at pending cases were governed only by the old law  the hi. gh court referred to sec  15 2  inserted by act no  8 of 19 76 and what. according to it  necessarily flowed from it in support of its conclusion  sec. 15 2  inserted by act no. 8 of 1976 166   2  without prejudice to any other remedy that m ay be. available to it under the rajasthan tenancy act  19 55  rajasthan act 3 of. 1955   if the state government  aft er calling for the record or otherwise  is. satisfied that a ny final order passed in any matter arising under the prov i. sions repealed by section 40  is in contravention of su ch repealed provisions. and that such order is prejudicial to the state government or that on account. the opening words of the section  without prejudice to a ny other remedy that. may be available to it under the rajasth an tenancy act  1955  act no  3 of. 1955    clearly show th at the pending cases have to be governed by the old. law. if transactions past and closed have to be reopened and decid ed afresh under. the provisions of the repealed law  and t he ceiling area under chapter iii of. the rajasthan tenancy ac t  1955  has to be fixed under its repealed. provisions  then it must follow as a necessary corollary  that the pending cas. es must be decided under the old law. the  ceiling area  had to be fixed wi th reference to the notified date i e. 1 4 1966 by the statut o  ry standards prescribed under the chapter iii b of. the  19 55 act   the two legislations are complementary to each oth er and. constitute two tier provisions  so far as the cases th at attracted and fell. within chapter iii b of 1955 act  as on 1 4 1966  would continue to be. governed by that law as t he fights and obligations created by the said. chapter iii  b amounted to create rights and incur liabilities  shir lod ha. submitted that the view taken by the high court was unexce p  tionable. 12   on a careful consideration of the matter  we are i n  clined to 167 agree. with the view taken by the high court on the poin t. the high court on the point is  in our opinion  somewhat tenuous  the conte n. anything inconsistent contained in any other l aw for the time being in force. the  19 55 act  which  according to the contention  even if kept ali ve would. yet be a  law for the time being in force  and  ther e  fore  be excluded by. virtue of section 3  this contenti on has been negatived by the high court. and in our opini on rightly  by placing reliance on the pronouncements of th. the expression  law for the time being in force  do es not take within its. sweep a law  deemed to be in force  a nd that  accordingly  the opening words. of sec  3 relied up on by the appellants  learned counsel will not have an. overri d  ing effect so as to exclude the old law. 13   a saving provision in a repealing statute is n ot exhaustive of the. rights and obligations so saved or t he rights that survive the repeal  it is. 14   re  contention b. this takes us to the next question whether in the prese nt cases 168 even if. the provisions of sec  6 of the rajasthan gener al clauses act  1955  are. attracted  the present cases did n ot involve any rights  accrued  or. obligations  incurred  so as to attract the old law to them to support. initiation or continuation of the proceedings against the land holde rs after. were held to have been saved it cou ld not be said that there was any right. accrued in favour of the state or any liability incurred by the land holders. in the matter of determination of the  ceiling area  so as to attract to their. cases the provisions of the old law  t he point  emphasised by the learned. counsel is that the exces s  land would vest in the state only after the. completion of the proceedings and upon the land holder signifying h is choice. as to the identify of the land to be surrendere d. clauses  c  and  e  of sec  6 of the rajashtan gener al clauses act  1955. liabil i  ty  acquired  accrued  or incurred under any enactment so repealed. or  affect any investigation  legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any. such right  privilege  obligatio n  liability  fine  penalty  forfeiture  or. punishment as aforesaid   for purposes of these clauses the  right  must be. accrued  and not merely an inchoate one  the distincti on between what is and. what is not a right preserved by secti on 6 of the  general clauses. act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act gca1897149    it is said. is often one of great fineness  what is unaffected by the repeal is a rig ht. acquired  or  accrued  under the repealed statute and n ot  a mere hope or. expectation  of acquiring a right or liber ty to apply for a right. determination of the extent of su r  plus land of a holder has to be made as. return within the prescribed peri od from the appointed day furnishing to each. of the collecto rs within whose jurisdiction any land in his holding is situa. him  if any person acquires  holds or com es into possession of any land. including any exempted land in excess of the ceiling area on or after the. appointed da y  such person has to furnish a return as stated above with in. the prescribed period from the date of taking possession of any land in excess. of the ceiling area                a contention similar to the one urged for. the appellan ts here that the title respecting the surplus land would ve st in. the government upon such land being taken possession of by government after. the declaration regarding the surpl us was noticed in that case  but  it was. held that the liabil i  ty to surrender the surplus land would date back to t. he appointed day  this court said. any other construction would make t he act unworkable and the. determination of the extent of su r  plus land of a holder ambulatory and. land is published in official gazette  but the liability to surre n  der the. surplus land relates back to the appointed day in case of those who held land. in excess of the ceiling on t he appointed day  therefore  even if the holder. land was not merely an inchoate rig ht under the act  but a right  accrued. within the meaning of sec  6  c  of the rajasthan general clauses act  1955  a. nd the liability of the land owner to surrender the excess la nd as on. 1 4 1986 was a liability  incurred  also within t he meaning of the said. provision  there is no substance in contention  b  either.

[Facts] you are here      liiofindia         databases   databases html      supreme court of india           1994            1994  insc 145. act. headnote. the judgment of the court was delivered by g n  ray  j  leave granted  this. appeal is directed against dismissal of the writ petition no  5803 of 1984. passed on 9  5 1991 made by the appellant before the allahabad high court. challenging the order of dismissal dated 11 9 1984 passed by the u p  public. services tribunal in claim no  3 of 1988 f iv 81  the aforesaid claim petition. was moved by the appellant before the u p  public services tribunal against. the order of termination of service of the appellant dated 15 4 1981  the. service of the appellant was sought to be terminated on payment of one month s. salary in lieu of notice by giving effect to the termination of service from. the date of service of the said order of termination  it may be stated here. that such notice was served on the appellant on 1 4 198 1. 2   the relevant facts concerning the above appeal may be stated as hereunder. the appellant was recommended for the post of overseer in the local self. government engineering department of uttar pradesh  hereinafter referred to as. lsged  by a selection committee  on such recommendation of the selection. committee  the appellant was appointed to the post of overseer by the chief. engineer  lsged and the appellant joined his duties as an overseer on. 8 10 1964. the post of overseer was later on redesignated as junior engineer. accordingly  the appellant was treated as junior engineer  the appellant s. service was made permanent by confirming him to the said post of junior. engineer w e f  1  4 1974 by an order dated 31 8 1975 passed by the chief. engineer  lsged  after the u p  jal nigam was established by the uttar pradesh. water supply sewerage act  1975  the service of the appellant was transferred. from lsged to uttar pradesh jal nigam a statutory body with the same terms and. conditions under which the appellant was working in the lsged  it appears that. in a writ petition no  103 of 1974 filed by one shri satya virat singh against. state of uttar pradesh  the high court of allahabad passed an interim order. restraining the respondent to confirm junior engineers. despite such order of injunction which was in force  the aforesaid order dated. 31 8 1975 was passed by the additional chief engineer  lsged confirming the. appellant to the post of junior engineer w e f  1 4 1974  after it was. detected that the said order of confirmation was illegal and contrary to the. interim order of injunction passed in the said writ petition  an order of. deconfirmation was issued on 8 2 1978 by which the confirmation of the service. of the appellant was recalled and the appellant was treated as holding a. temporary post of junior engineer  it may be stated in this connection  that. such order of rectification of the earlier order of confirmation was not made. by informing the appellant and giving him opportunity of being heard  it. appears that some orders of transfers were passed against the appellant but. the appellant went on long leave on medical ground and continued to remain on. leave and after medical leave was over  he joined his earlier place of posting. at kanpur and not at the place where he was scheduled to join on transfer. thereafter  the appellant was served with the said order of termination with. immediate effect by giving one month s salary in lieu of one month s notice. 183 3 the appellant challenged such order of termination before the u p. public services tribunal at lucknow inter alia contending that he was a. deconfirmation of his service and the order of termination was passed against. him mala fide in view of the fact that he being the president of u p  jal. nigam employees1 union at kanpur  incurred the displeasure of the higher. authorities for raising voice of protest against improper action of u p  jal. nigam and seeking redressal of the grievances of the employees of the jal. nigam  the appellant also contended that there was no valid reason for. terminating the service of the appellant and he was singled out on the pretext. that he had suffered adverse entries in the confidential character roll for. the years 1965 66 and 1978 79  the appellant contended that entry for the year. 1965 66 was a stale entry and could not have been taken into consideration for. 4   such submission of the appellant was disputed by the u p  jal nigam by. contending that the order of confirmation of the appellant s temporary service. was passed in total disregard of the impugned order of injunction passed by. the high court in the said writ petition and the mistake committed in passing. such order was later on rectified  for such rectification  no hearing was. required to be given to the appellant  it was also contended on behalf of the. u p. jal nigam that service of the appellant was not at all satisfactory  the. adverse entries in the confidential character roll for the year 1978 79 was. indicated to the appellant and the representation made by the appellant. against such adverse remark was also rejected  that apart  for other years. also the assessment of the appellant s service was not at all satisfactory and. the rating of the service of the appellant was only  average  for the other. years  a selection committee took into consideration the cases of temporary. junior engineers for confirmation and out of 43 junior engineers  33 were made. permanent on assessment of their work but appellant s service was not. terminated with immediate effect by giving one month s salary in lieu of one. month s notice  it was contended by the u p  jal nigam that the appellant s. service was not terminated by way of punishment as sought to be contended by. him but the temporary service of the appellant was terminated according to the. service rules by giving one month s salary in lieu of one month s notice on. 5   the u p  public services tribunal rejected the claim petition of the. appellant by holding inter alia that the appellant was holding a temporary. service and the confirmation given to the appellant through mistake was. rectified  it was held by the tribunal that the order of termination was not. 184 passed mala fide or by way of punishment but the same was passed after. assessing the appellant s service records which was found to be not. satisfactory  the tribunal also held that since the impugned order of. termination was passed by giving one month s salary in lieu of one month s. notice as per the conditions of service and without any stigma attached to the. services tribunal rejecting his claim petition by moving a writ petition. tribunal and dismissed the writ petition holding inter alia that such order. was passed on assessment of the service records of the appellant without. attaching any stigma against the appellant and in conformity with the service. stigma was attached in the impugned order of termination of the service of the. appellant  in effect the order was a punitive order intended to get rid of the. appellant because of his union activities thereby incurring the displeasure of. the higher authorities. the union  an excuse of unsuitable service was sought to be found out by. relying on stale service record for the year 1965 66 and an adverse entry made. 1978 79  the appellant did not suffer any adverse entry in the service record. in the recent past and the rating of the appellant as average does not. average the appellant was allowed to continue in service for a number of. years  there was no reason  far less a fair reason  to hold the appellant. unsuitable for retention in service at a late stage  mr mukhoty has contended. that the said order of termination at an advanced stage of the appellant s. career created a serious prejudice to the appellant thereby practically. order of termination of service and direct the respondent to confirm the. appellant from the date from which the other junior engineers were confirmed. in service and to give all consequential benefits of such service of the. appellant. 2   1987  insc 76  http   www liiofindia org in cases cen insc 1987 76 html. 1987  2 scc 188    cgi bin lawcite cit  281987 29 202 20scc 20188   1987  3. atc 496 186. 8   such contention of mr mukhoty was seriously disputed by the learned. was passed after assessing the service records of the appellant  it has been. permanent  the appellant s service was found to be unsatisfactory and it was. notice without attaching any stigma in the order of termination  the learned. termination on the score that such order has been passed after allowing the. employee concerned to remain in temporary service for 18 years  the learned. order of termination simpliciter on assessment of suitability after. tribunal and high court were justified in holding that the impugned order of. termination was validly passed on assessment of service record of the. bin lawcite cit 1992 20scc 20 28l 20 26 20s 29 20440   1992  19 atc 931 4. 1991 1 scc691 1991 scc l s 587  1991 16atc498 187 case no stale record was. taken into consideration  even if the service record of 1965 66 is left out of. consideration  the adverse entry made in the service record of the appellant. in 1978 79 cannot be held to be stale entry for the purpose of considering the. suitability of the appellant in 1981  the learned counsel has contended that. the appellant failed to get any superior rating over a long span of years. order was passed in complete violation of the interim order of injunction. passed by the high court in the writ proceedings which debarred the. respondents from confirming any junior engineer  since the order of. confirmation of the appellant was made in violation of the injunction order. the mistake committed in passing the order of confirmation was corrected  in. injunction passed by the high court and the same being invalid was got to be. corrected  in any event. the finding of the tribunal that the impugned order of termination was passed. the appellant was a president of local union at kanpur  and according to him. he had raised demands on behalf of the employees  there are no materials. warranting a finding that he was picked up for incurring displeasure of the. higher authorities and the service was sought to be terminated mala fide on. some pretext  it appears that although the appellant had remained in service. for 16 years but the service record of the appellant was not at all convincing. even within a span of five years prior to the date of consideration of the. suitability to be retained in temporary service  he suffered an adverse entry. and despite opportunity to make representation  such entries were maintained. the assessment of other years of service in the recent past was also not. assuring and the appellant was rated as average  if on consideration of such. service records  the appropriate committee did not find the appellant suitable. to be confirmed in service and the authorities concerned on consideration of. poor service record of the appellant had come to the finding that he was not. suitable to be retained in service and the impugned order was passed without. service record of the appellant was not good  the authorities concerned had. allowed him to continue in service despite the poor rating and adverse. entries  the appellant has advanced in age and there is force in the. nigam to pay a sum of rs 75 000 to the appellant within a period of three.
[Ratio of the decision] permanent employee having rendered total period of service for 16 years in. lsged and in u p. considered satisfactory for making him permanent  accordingly  his service was. proper assessment of his service records. rules by giving one month s salary in lieu of one month s notice. that the said order was not just and fair but was actuated by mala fide and. in the said decision that for retiring a government servant compulsorily. stale adverse entries of more than ten years back should not be taken into. consideration  only  the current service records could be taken into. consideration for deciding a case of compulsory retirement provided adverse. entries made in the service records had been communicated to the government. employees concerned and reasonable opportunities to hear against such entries. depriving him to any chance to get a suitable job elsewhere at the late stage. of life  he has submitted that the court should take into consideration all. the facts and circumstances of the case to come to a proper decision as to. whether or not action of the jal nigam is fair and just  he has submitted that. although the service of a temporary employee is liable to be terminated on the. ground of unsuitability of giving one month s salary in lieu of one month s. notice  the court should not allow such termination of service if the same is. passed unjustly by singling out a poor employee as unsuitable though the facts. and circumstances clearly indicate that his service was not found unsuitable. at any point of time  he has  therefore  submitted that the u p  public. services tribunal and the allahabad high court failed to appreciate the lack. of fairness in passing the said order of termination and had gone wrong in not. setting aside the said unjust and improper order of termination  he has. our view  in such circumstances  the appellant was not required to be given. any opportunity of being heard for correcting such mistake because there was. no occasion to take one view or the other in the matter of correction of the. said mistake on the basis of the representation to be made by the appellant. the order of confirmation was per se illegal and in violation of the order of. without any stigma and not as a punitive measure has been upheld by the high. court and we find no justification in taking a contrary view simply because. 50 000 as ex gratia within four months  the facts and circumstances of this. case are also similar and for the same reason  although we have not interfered. with the termination of the service of the appellant  we direct the u p  jal. months from today  although appeal is dismissed  in the facts and.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. judgment of district munsif  poonch by which a suit of the appellant. challenging the order of dismissal passed on january 31  1978 had been. decreed  which order had come to be upheld by district judge  feeling. aggrieved at which the high court had been approached by way of second appeal. another is a writ petition filed directly in this court making a grievance. 3   the high court dismissed the suit of the appellant on two grounds   1  the. referred to as the  act    the commission vide its order dated march 14  1974. recommended to the governor the dismissal of the appellant from service  after. receipt of this recommendation the appellant was called upon on july 4  1974. to show cause as to why he should not be dismissed from service  by. communications of august 13  1974 and january 4  1976 the appellant approached. the officer concerned to supply copy of the proceedings of the inquiry. on march 15  1978 with the direction to the authorities to make available a. copy of the proceedings of the inquiry  before that order had come to be. passed  the appellant had been dismissed from service by an order dated. january 31  1978 which came to be challenged in writ petition no  23 of 1978. that petition was dismissed by judgment dated june 1  1979 on the ground that. a very complicated question of fact was involved  a letters patent appeal. being preferred the bench also took the 427 view that  a disputed question of. fact of complicated nature was involved   the bench  however  observed that. its order will not  prevent the appellant from pursuing whatever other remedy. may be available to him under law. 6   thereafter started the present proceeding which consists of filing of a. suit by the appellant on july 26  1980 challenging the order of dismissal as. void and illegal  the trial court decreed the suit principally on the ground. and the dismissal order was passed in violation of the mandatory provision of. section 17 5  of the act  the district judge dismissed the state s appeal as. being barred by limitation  the high court dismissed the revision application. court on the ground that dismissal order having been passed in violation of. section 17 5  of the act was null and void  on the high court being approached. 1993  3 scc 161 4   1968  insc. 93  http   www liiofindia org in cases cen insc 1968 93 html    air 1969 sc 78. cgi bin lawcite cit air 201969 20sc 2078    1968  3 scr 662    cgi. bin lawcite cit  281968 29 203 20scr 20662   1968  22 stc 416 429 aforesaid. writ petition and  therefore  to take a view that the decision in earlier. interfere with the order of punishment  the court tribunal should not. 727    cgi bin lawcite cit  281993 29 204 20scc 20727  1993 scc  l s  ii 84. 1993  25 atc 704. jt   1993  6 sc 1   cgi bin lawcite cit  281993 29 206 20sc 201  6 union of. india v  mohd  ramzan khan    1990  insc. 362  http   www liiofindia org in cases cen insc 1990 362 html     1991  1 scc. 588    cgi bin lawcite cit  281991 29 201 20scc 20588.
[Ratio of the decision] civil court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit  and  2  the suit was. barred by res judicata. view taken that the civil court had no jurisdiction is untenable in law  as to. 5   let us first deal with the question of jurisdiction. to decide this  reference may be made to skeletal facts. these are that the conduct of the appellant while serving as a clerk in the. office of commandant  home guards at poonch came to be enquired in the year. 1972 by anti corruption commission set up under the provisions of jammu and. kashmir  government servants  prevention of corruption act  1962  hereinafter. including the report of the commission to enable him to submit his. explanation  this not having been done  the appellant challenged the action by. approaching the high court in wp no  413 of 1978 which came to be disposed of. that the appellant had not been supplied with a copy of enquiry proceedings. in taking this view the high court has relied on section 20 of the act which. has provided that   nothing done or purporting to have been done under this. act shall be called in question in any court. 8   shri mehta urges that the finality given by section 20 of the act could. not have ousted the jurisdiction of civil court in the present case inasmuch. as the dismissal order being a nullity  court s jurisdiction did not get. barred because of the aforesaid provision  to bring home this submission of. law  we are referred by the learned counsel to the constitution bench decision. of this court in ram swarup v  shikar chand1 in which case the bench while. the aforesaid provision would not operate in cases where the plea raised. before the civil court goes to the root of the matter and this would be so. where the impugned order is a nullity. k v  abdul ghani patwari2 the dismissal order has to be regarded as nullity. this submission is buttressed by referring to one of the illustrations given. in paragraph 13 of shikar chand case1 which is that if a statute were to grant. permission to a landlord to sue tenant after issuance of notice  non  issuance. of the notice would render the impugned order completely invalid  it is urged. that section 17 5  of the act having provided. of law  the same amounted to  jurisdictional error  because of which civil. of res judicata   it is clear from what has been noted above  that there was. no decision on merits as regards the grievance of the appellant  and so  the. principle of res judicata had no application  the mere fact that the learned. single judge while disposing of the writ petition no  23 of 78 had observed. that. this syndrome of errors  omissions and oddities  cannot be explained on any. hypothesis other than the one that there is something fishy in the. petitioner s version. which observations have been relied upon by the high court in holding that the. suit was barred by res judicata do not at all make out a case of applicability. of the principle of res judicata  the conclusion of the high court on this. score is indeed baffling to us  because  for res judicata to operate the. involved issue must have been  heard and finally decided   there was no. decision at all on the merit of the grievance of the petitioner in the 3. proceeding operated as res judicata was absolutely erroneous  not to speak of. its being uncharitable. 13   in view of the aforesaid  the judgment of the high court cannot be. sustained  the cases have presented no difficulty to us so far  the head. scratching important question is what consequential order is required to be. passed  keeping in view the constitution bench decision in managing director. of a copy of inquiry officer s report would not make an order of dismissal per. se bad if that order had come to be passed before november 20  1990  which is. the date of the decision of this court in ramzan khan case6  the dismissal. order in present case had been passed long before the aforesaid date  as per. the decision in ecil  in such a case the matter has to be referred back as. indicated in paragraph 31 of the judgment according to which on the matter. being taken up again the employee would be served with copy of the report and. would be given an opportunity to show as to how his or her case was prejudiced. because of the non supply of the report. then  if after hearing the parties  the court tribunal were to come to. conclusion that the non supply of the report had made no difference to the. ultimate finding and the punishment given  the court tribunal should not. mechanically set aside the order of dismissal on the ground that the report. was not given  resorting to short cuts were desired to be avoided. not apply to the facts of the present case inasmuch as requirement to serve a. copy of the proceedings of the inquiry cannot be said to be part of natural. justice here  which was the view taken in ramzan khan case6 and which aspect. had come to be principally examined in ecil case5  the aforesaid requirement. in case at hand owes its origin to a statutory provision   the same being. been stated in paragraph 33 of the ecil case5 in which the bench accepted that. to be set aside by us in this proceeding itself  as the dismissal having been. passed in violation of mandatory provision was null and void and a void order. has no legs to stand. 15   we have duly considered the aforesaid submission and because of what is. being stated later we would have to disappoint the learned counsel because. according to us  a view different from the one expressed in 5   1993  4 scc. provided by the section 80 is a protection given to the person concerned and. if in a particular case that person does not require the protection he can. lawfully waive his right  a distinction was made in this regard where the. benefit conferred was to serve  an important purpose   in which case there. would not be waiver  see paragraph 14. capable of being abnegated  as such a right cannot be said to involve any. interest of community or public welfare so as to be in mischief of public. policy. 20   having seen the pronouncements of judicial fora  we can now inform. ourselves as to the view of the reputed authors on interpretation of statutes. as well as administrative law. we may start with what has been stated in maxwell s the interpretation of. statutes  this aspect has been dealt at pages 328 330  12th edn   and it has. been stated that if the benefit be for the protection of an individual in his. private capacity the same can be waived  to illustrate  reference has been. made about waiver of the benefit of the limitation act  this is on the maxim. interest there can be no waiver of the same. 21   craies in his statute law has opined the same  as would appear from what. has been stated at page 269 of 7th edn  by drawing attention to the aforesaid. maxim  it has been observed that if the object of a statute is  not one of. general policy  or if the thing which is being done will benefit only a. particular person or class of persons  then the conditions prescribed by the. statute are not considered as being indispensable   to illustrate this. principle  it has been stated that if the statutory condition be imposed. simply for the security or the benefit of the parties to the action. themselves  such condition will not be considered as indispensable and either. party may waive it. 22   crawford in his interpretation of laws takes the same view as would. appear from pages 540 542  1989 reprint   the learned author while quoting the. aforesaid maxim states at page 542 that requirement like giving of notice may. be waived as the same is intended for the benefit of the person concerned. 23   we may also refer to the views expressed by francis bennion in his. statutory interpretation  1984   wherein this aspect has been dealt with at. pages 27 et seq and it has been stated that if the performance of statutory. duty be one which would come within the aforesaid maxim  the person entitled. to the performance can effectively waive performance of the duty by the person. bound  as an illustration mention has been made  at page 29  of 12  1990  4. party can waive the objection  if he can waive  it amounts to irregularity and. if he cannot  it is a nullity. 26   let it now be seen whether the requirement of giving copy of the. proceeding of the inquiry mandated by section 17 5  of the act is one which is. for the benefit of the individual concerned or serves a public purpose  if it. be former  it is apparent  in view of the aforesaid legal position  that the. same can be waived  if it be latter  it cannot be  though shri mehta has urged. that this requirement serves a public purpose  we do not agree. according to us  the requirement is for the benefit of the person concerned. which is to enable him to know as to what had taken place during the course of. the proceedings so that he is better situated to show his cause as to why the. proposed penalty should not be imposed  such a requirement cannot be said to. be relatable to public policy or one concerned with public interest  or to. serve a public purpose. 27   we  therefore  hold that the requirement mentioned in section 17 5  of. the act despite being mandatory is one which can be waived  if  however  the. requirement has not been waived any act or action in violation of the same. would be a nullity  in the present case as the appellant had far from waiving. the benefit  asked for the copy of the proceeding despite which the same was. not made available  it has to be held that the order of dismissal was invalid. in law. 28   the aforesaid  however  is not sufficient to demand setting aside of the. dismissal order in this proceeding itself because what has been stated in 13. 29   according to us  therefore  the legal and proper order to be passed in. the present case also  despite a mandatory provision having been violated  is. to require the employer to furnish a copy of the proceeding and to call upon. the high court to decide thereafter as to whether non furnishing of the copy. prejudiced the appellant petitioner and the same has made difference to the. ultimate finding and punishment given  if this question would be answered in. bench of the high court to dispose of the matter within a period of three. months from the date of the receipt of this order  insofar as the present. proceeding is concerned  we make no order as to costs.

[Facts] the judgment of the court was delivered by b p  jeevan reddy  j   the appeal. is preferred against the judgment of the customs  excise and gold  control. appellate tribunal allowing an appeal filed by the collector of central excise. against the decision of the collector  appeals. 2 the appellant m s united glass  bangalore is not a separate legal entity  it. is a manufacturing unit within the khoday group of industries  khoday. distilleries limited  kdl  is said to be the holding company  one of the. companies held by kdl was khoday brewing and distilling industries private. limited  kdbi  of which the appellant is a division  there is a partnership. firm  khoday  rca  the partners of the said firm are all members of the khoday. family which controls the kdl and kdbi  the main business of this group of. industries is manufacturing and bottling of beer and other alcoholic liquors. 3 until 1978  the bottles required by the said group of industries for. bottling beer and other alcoholic liquors were purchased from m s alembic. glass industries which has a plant near bangalore  in the year 1978  however. the said group of industries established their own unit for manufacturing. bottles  the appellant herein  the controversy in this appeal relates to the. determination of the value of the bottles manufactured by the appellant  the. period concerned is 1 7 1979 to 30 6 1983. 4 two price lists were filed by the appellant  one on 24  10 1979 and the. other on 10 9 1981  they were approved provisionally  on scrutiny  the excise. authorities found that the value indicated by the appellant was much below the. cost of production and that the data furnished in that behalf was vague and. incomplete  it was also found that in the early years of production  some. bottles were sold by the appellant to others also  besides supplying to 387. the other units in the group  accordingly  two show cause notices dated. 8 2 1984 and 16 6 1984 were issued proposing to redetermine the values of the. bottles under rule 7 of the central excise  valuation  rules  1975  i e. under clause  b  of section 4 1  of the act  the show cause notices contained. the relevant data in support of the valuation which the authorities proposed. to adopt  after hearing the appellant  the assistant collector confirmed the. values proposed in the show cause notices  the appeal preferred by the. appellant was  however  allowed by the collector  appeals  who directed the. assistant collector to adopt the sale price charged by the appellant to others. as the basis and to finalise the value under section 4 1  a  of the act. against the decision of the collector  appeals   the collector of central. excise went in appeal to the tribunal  which allowed the appeal on the. following findings. a  that the price declared by the appellant was far below the cost price and. is totally unacceptable  the price declared was only a fraction of the price. charged by m s alembic glass industries for similar glass bottles. during the material period  1 7 1979 to 30 6  1983  wherever the prices. declared by the respondents were lower than those of m s alembic for the. comparable bottles  the prices as approved for m s alembic should be adopted. as the basis of assessment for the glass bottles manufactured by the. the tribunal held that the valuation of the bottles manufactured by the. appellant cannot be done under section 4 1  a  but should be done under. section 4 1  b  and that the price of comparable bottles manufactured by. alembic glass industries should be taken as the basis  the tribunal should. have directed that prices of alembic alone should be uniformly adopted as the. value of all types of bottles manufactured by the appellant  it could not have. directed the determination on a dual and mutually inconsistent basis  388. viz   where the prices of alembic are higher than the prices declared by the. appellant  the prices of alembic should be adopted but where the prices of. alembic were lower than the prices declared by the appellant  the appellant s.
[Ratio of the decision] respondents an d supplied to other units in the khoday group. the department would be entitled to finalise the assessments on this basis and. make consequential recoveries of duties from the respondents  the respondents. are directed to pay the differential duties so demanded forthwith. iii  where the assessee so arranges that the goods are generally not sold by. the related person in the course of wholesale trade at the time of removal  to. dealers  not being related persons  or where such goods 389 are not sold to. such dealers  to dealers  being related persons  who sell such goods in. retail. b  where the normal price of such goods is not ascertainable for the reason. that such goods are not sold or for any other reason  the nearest. ascertainable equivalent thereof determined in such manner as may be. prescribed. 8   under section 37 of the act  the central government has framed the central. excise  valuation  rules  1975 which govern the valuation of excisable goods. under section 4 1  b   rules 6 and 7  which are relevant for our purpose  read. thus. 6  if the value of the excisable goods under assessment cannot be determined. under rule 4 or 5  and   a  where such goods are sold by the assessee in. such amount as is necessary and reasonable in the opinion of the proper. officer to arrive at the price at which the assessee would have sold such. goods in the course of wholesale trade to a person other than a related. person. provided that in determining the amount of reduction  due regard shall be had. to the nature of the excisable goods  the trade practice in that commodity and. other relevant factors. b  where the excisable goods are not sold by the assessee but are used or. consumed by him or on his behalf in the production or manufacture of other. class to which such buyers belong is known at the time of removal  on the. basis of the price at which the goods are ordinarily sold by the related. person to such class of buyers. provision is attracted where the manufacturer does not sell the goods in. question but uses or consumes them himself in the manufacture of other. articles  in such a case  the rule says  adopt the value of the comparable. the revenue adopts the value of another assessee manufacturing similar goods. that alone should be the basis and that the revenue cannot adopt or shift to. another basis  it is not possible to agree  the submission of the learned.

[Facts] k r nagaraja  adv  for the appellant shanta kr  and k k  gupta  advs  for the. respondent o r d e r the following order of the court was delivered. the special land acquisition officer  srirangapatnam v. nagegowda o r d e r leave granted. we have heard learned counsel on both sides. notification under section 4  1  of the land acquisition act  1894 was. published on december 26  1985 acquiring land admeasuring 5 acres 21 gunthas. for the purpose of formation of hemavathi left bank canal  the land. acquisition officer awarded compensation on february 23  1988   rs  4800   per. acre  on reference  the civil judge relying upon ex p 3 awarded compensation. rs  20000   per acre  he categorically rejected the contention of the claimant. that he was growing sugarcane  hybride jowar and mulberry getting a full yield. of rs  25000   acre  on appeal  the high court by impugned judgment dated. august 18  1994 in fa no  1311 94 confirmed the same  thus this appeal by. special leave. 10000   per acre with solatium at 30  under section 23  2   interest under. section 28 9  for one year from the taking of possession and at 15  thereafter. on enhanced compensation till date of deposit into court and additional amount.
[Ratio of the decision] having considered the facts and circumstances in this case  we think that. reasonable compensation would be rs. 10000   per acre  the judgement referring to ex  a 3 has been placed before us. and it indicates that it related to land with coconut trees  even the amount. awarded by the civil judge in that case is now subject matter in the appeal. before the district judge filed under section 54 of the act. under these circumstances  ex  a 3 is absolutely irrelevant for determination. of the compensation  accordingly  the respondent is entitled to enhanced. compensation   rs.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. home        databases   databases html     worldlii  http   www worldlii org. search   forms search1 html     feedback   liiofindia feedback html. supreme court of india. you are here      liiofindia         databases   databases html      supreme court of india           2000            2000  insc 144. database search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc     name. search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc title 1     recent. decisions     recent html. noteup   form search  method boolean query insc 2000 144 or 2000 insc 144. lawcite   cgi bin lawcite  cit 2000 insc 144. help   liiofindia help cases html. malempati pattabi narendra v  ghattamaneni maruthi prasad   ors  2000. insc 144  27 march 2000. appeal  crl   447 of 1998 appeal  crl   448 of 1998. k t  thomas   d p  mohapatra. thomas  j. l   i   t       t       t       t       t       t       t  j for the murder of. a gram sarpanch the sessions court which tried the case convicted 6 persons. for various offences including criminal conspiracy to commit the said murder. but a division bench of the andhra pradesh high court  on appeal filed by the. convicted persons  acquitted most of them and even regarding the two who were. under section 326 of the indian penal code  they were sentenced to undergo ri. for 7 years  hence they have appealed before us by special leave  the son of. the deceased filed a separate appeal by special leave challenging the judgment. of the high court in so far as it is favourable to the accused  the state of. andhra pradesh has also filed an appeal for restoring the conviction and. sentence passed by the trial court  we heard all the appeals together. the incident happened on the night of 18 1 1993  on a public road  prosecution. case is that the deceased sitaram anjanalelu  the gram sarpanch  was. proceeding to the house of his daughter sujatha  who is married to a k  rao. the time was around 11 00 p m  when the deceased reached almost near that. house  then 5 accused  all except a 4 shashiah  jumped out from ambush  and. waylaid the deceased  after surrounding him the accused showered him with. blows by using axe  knife and similar lethal weapons  the victim died at the. spot after sustaining extensive injuries. the background for the said occurrence  as pictured by the prosecution  is. that the deceased was a congress leader and 4th accused shashiah belonged to. cpi and as between them there were enough causes for rivalry including an. election which was held to the board of directors of a co operative society in. which a panel set up by the deceased had trounced the candidate set up by the. 4th accused  the newly elected board of directors initiated proceedings. against the 4th accused  who held the office of president of the same society. earlier  for misappropriation of the funds of the society  thereupon 4th. accused entered into a conspiracy with other accused for liquidating the. deceased sitaram anjanalelu  accused 1  2 and 3 are the sons of 4th accused. and accused lal bahadur is his nephew  p w 1  pattabhi narendra  is the son of. the deceased  he lodged a complaint in writing with the police on the same. night in which he said that he was walking a few yards behind his father and. witnessed the incident in which all the accused  including the 4th accused. shashiah  launched the attack on his father. but the investigating officer came to understand that a 4 was interned in a. jail on the previous day in connection with some other case  and therefore  it. was impossible for him to be present at the scene of occurrence  so the. investigating officer charge  sheeted the remaining accused mentioned in the. complaint for the offence under section 302 read with section 149 of the. indian penal code. nonetheless  a 4 was also arraigned as an accused on the allegation that he. had hatched a criminal conspiracy with the other accused to finish the. deceased off. dr  j  krishnamurthy  pw 10  conducted the autopsy on the dead body of the. deceased  he noticed 17 incised injuries out of which 10 were on the head  3. injuries among them were the most serious injuries and the brain of the. deceased was lacerated. at the outset  we have to point out that the division bench of the high court. has committed a serious error in holding that the offence proved as against. a 1 and a 3 is only under section 326 of the indian penal code  the. the indian penal code. on the conspectus of the facts of this case  the only inquiry which the court. cannot escape conviction under section 302 read with section 149 of the indian. penal code  pw2 and pw3 are the other two witnesses who said that they were. residing in the house of a k  rao son in law of the deceased  and on hearing. the hue and cry from the nearby road they rushed out and saw the assailants. showering blows on the deceased with axe and knife  etc  would pw1 have been. present at the place when the occurrence took place  we have noticed some. had passed away on the previous evening  when pw1 was asked about that fact. he said that the parents of pw2 had gone to other village as they got the. his grandmother particularly because his parents who were living with him  had. already gone away to see the old lady in her death bed. pw3  pothuraju   an employee under deceased s son in  law a k  rao said that. he was residing in one of the rooms of the house of a k  rao  his evidence is. in tune with pw1 and pw2 and so he also said that a person resembling a4 was. one of the main assailants  why did he also say that  pw3 being a dependant of. a k  rao appears to be speaking in tune with his master because he admitted. that he was a witness in another case against a1 to a4 which was tried in. 1980   he also admitted that even his father was a witness against a4 in a. home and on the way  he saw these accused except a4  running with axe  knife. etc  the time was about 11 00 p m  then  a little later  pw4 saw the three. witnesses  pw1  pw2 and pw3  and pw4 went to the scene of occurrence and saw. the deceased lying injured and he got the entire narration of the incident. that day  but when another counsel appearing for the remaining accused. confronted him with ext  d 17  a copy of his deposition which he gave in 1957. in another case   he admitted that he had deposed against a4 even in 1957  as. the defence strongly disputed his claim that he was employed by koteswararao. conviction sentence passed on them  they are acquitted  the remaining appeals.
[Ratio of the decision] found guilty the high court has chosen to convict them only of the offence. assailants  who had participated in the occurrence in which deceased was. killed so brutally  cannot escape from conviction under section 302 at least. with the help of section 34  if not with section 149 of the indian penal code. the conviction of the assailant or assailants who inflicted grievous injuries. which resulted in the death of the victim cannot be limited to section 326 of. needs to conduct is whether any one of the accused was among the assailants. who inflicted injuries on the deceased  if the finding is in the affirmative. then that accused cannot escape conviction under section 302 with the aid of. section 34  if not with section 149 of the indian penal code. as this is an appeal under article 136 of the constitution  normally  we would. not reopen the concurrent findings relating to the appreciation of evidence. but in this case if we adopt that standard  the sequel is that conviction. passed on second and third accused will have to be altered to section 302. i p c  and the sentence has to be enhanced to at least imprisonment for life. in view of such a consequence befalling the convicted persons  we feel it. order to reach our conclusion regarding the reliability of the evidence of the. prosecution. if the testimony of pw1 is believable  the corollary is that the testimony of. pw2  pw3 and pw4 can also be believed because each of them has identified the. other as present at the scene  the consequence is that the accused except a4. occurrence took place  it does not stand to reason why he was completely. spared by the assailants  it is difficult to believe that if pw1 was present. a young man of 33 like him could not have done even a bit to go to the rescue. of his father and if he had done so  he would have sustained injuries  at. least some minor injuries  but the fact is that pw1 did not sustain even a. scratch on his person  yet another aspect is that if pw1 waited to rush to his. dying father till the assailants stopped attacking him even then it is. difficult for us to conceive that at least the clothes of pw1 could not have. been smeared with some blood  if not copious blood  but nobody has noticed. even a drop of blood on his clothes. we are in complete dearth of satisfactory explanation for such broad features. staring at the reliability of pw1 s version  attached to the above features is. another odd feature  the fir has been prepared on the strength of a written. complaint furnished by pw1  he said that the complaint was scribed by his. nephew who was residing 13 kilometers away from the place  that scribe was not. examined as a witness  we do not know how that scribe was brought to this. place from such a distance and at what time. there certainly would have been confabulations and deliberations before. preparing the written complaint. it is pertinent to notice that pw2 and pw3 also said in their examination in. chief itself that an assailant resembling a4 had participated in the. occurrence by hacking the deceased with an axe on the head  but even they. refrained from saying more than that  lest  any assertion that a4 participated. in the crime would contaminate their testimony  when we read the further. portion of the testimony of pw2 and pw3  we have come across reasons to be. slow in acting on such testimony as well. pw2 admitted that he was doing contract work in an industrial establishment. owned by deceased s brother  venugopal rao   the defence counsel seriously. disputed that claim of pw2  it was sought to be made out that pw2 could not. have been present on that night even in that village because his grand mother. information that his grand mother was very serious and she died at 7 00 p m. pw2 would clearly have anticipated that he would be confronted with that. question during cross examination  so he put forward an excuse that he was. informed of the death of his grandmother only on the next morning  it is. difficult for us to believe that pw2 was unaware of the serious condition of. case tried in 1968  we have difficulty to place reliance on the testimony of. such a witness as pw2 in the aforesaid background. although pw4 did not see the occurrence or any part of it  prosecution. examined him as a corroborating witness  he said that he was a watchman of the. poultry farm of one a. koteswararao and after his work was over on the date of occurrence  he walked. from pw3  normally  a witness like pw4 would be sufficient to corroborate the. to the day time  if so how could he account for his presence at the scene of. occurrence at 11 00 p m   the above are features which dissuade us from. placing reliance on his testimony as a witness of truth. for the aforesaid reasons  we are unable to hold that prosecution has. succeeded in establishing that the accused in this case were the assailants. who attacked the deceased. we entertain a reasonable doubt on that score. in the result  we allow the appeal filed by a1 and a3 and set aside the.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. headnote. o r d e r leave granted. we have heard learned counsel on both sides. this appeal by special leave arises from the order of the high court of. karnataka dated 19 9 1990 made in wa no 494 90  the admitted facts are that. the respondents 4 and 5  by name doddaramaiah and chikkaramaiah  sons of late. gurappa of bangalore were granted five acres of agricultural land under rule. 43  8  of the mysore land revenue code on february 13  1940 for use and. enjoyment of the government land  rule 43  8  reads as under. occupancies granted to applicants belonging to depressed classes under rule. 43 5  above and those granted by government free of upset price or reduced. upset price to poor and landless people of other communities or to religious. mutchalikas in the form prescribed by government  this shall not  however. prevent lands granted to depressed classes under rule 43 5  being accepted as. act  1978  for short  the  act   declaring alienation by the assignee. classes  in furtherance thereof  thee respondents 4   5 filed an application. 1985 for restoration of the land  the competent authority allowed the. application which was confirmed on appeal and  therefore  the writ petitions. came to be dismissed  thus this appeal by special leave. sri p r ramasesh  learned counsel for the appellant contended that there was. no prohibition as against the appellant  since he obtained the title after the. expiry of ten years from the date of the assignment by the government. the appellant had perfected title by adverse possession. support of his contention  he placed reliance on other judgment of this. karnataka   ors  etc  etc    1995  insc. 471  http   www liiofindia org in cases cen insc 1995 471 html     1995  5. scale 620     cgi bin lawcite cit 1995 205 20scale 20620. land to the appellant are estopped to challenge the sale and whether the sale. is valid and also whether appellant perfected his title by adverse possession.
[Ratio of the decision] charitable institutions  shall not be alienated and the grantees shall execute. security for any loan which they may wish to obtain from government of from a. co operative society for the bonafide purposes of improving the land. a reading of the said rule would indicate that with a view to augment the. economic conditions of the scheduled castes  scheduled castes and other weaker. sections of the society  government may assigned the land to them or to. cooperative societies composed of them  it is not in dispute that the. appellant had purchased the land from the assignees under a registered sale. deed on december 19  1958  the karnataka legislature enacted karnataka. schedules castes and schedules tribes  as void and inoperative  procedure has. been prescribed for restoration of the lands the assignees or if they not. available  the land resumed be assigned to eligible persons from those. therefore  the act is inapplicable to such a situation  in support of his. in view of the rival contention raised on both sides  the questions that arise. for consideration are  whether the respondents 5 and 6 who have alienated the. as against the state  it is seen that article 46 of the constitution  in terms. of its preamble  enjoins upon the state to provide economic justice to the. scheduled castes  scheduled tribes and other weaker sections of the society. and to prevent their exploitation  under article 39  b  of the constitution. the state is enjoined to distribute its largess  land  to sub  serve the. public good  the right to economic justice to the scheduled castes  scheduled. tribes and other weaker is a fundamental right to secure equality of status. opportunity and liberty  economic justice is a facet of liberty without which. having been made in furtherance thereof  any alienation  in its contravention. right  title or interest thereunder  it is seen that rule 43  a  specifically. prohibits alienation of assigned land  it does not prescribe any limitation of. time as such  however  it is contended that the appellant has obtained land by. way of sale in 1958 long before the act came into force and thereby he. perfected his title by adverse possession  we find no force in contention. alienate the land  therefore  having come into possession under colour of. title from original grantee  if the appellant intends to plead adverse. by the appellant   the ratio thereof squarely applies to the facts in this. case. validity of the rule has been gone into  therein  this court had gone into the. question of adverse possession as against the purchaser but not as against the. state  unless the purchaser derives valid title  the question of title does. not arise  if he remained to be in possession in his own right de hors the. title  necessarily he has to plead and prove the date from which he disclaimed. his title and asserted possessory title as against the state and perfected his. possession to the knowledge of the real owner  viz   the state  in this case. behalf  the plea of adverse possession as against the state does not arise. even otherwise as the proceedings were laid before the expiry of a period of. 30 years  the question of estoppel against the respondent does not arise as.

[Facts] you are here      liiofindia         databases   databases html      supreme court of india           2000            2000  insc 145. lawcite   cgi bin lawcite  cit 2000 insc 145. insc 145  28 march 2000. y k sabharwal  s s ahmad. y k sabharwal j. the appellant was ordered to be dismissed from service in terms of the. dismissal order dated 24th april  1987 passed by the employer   respondent. no 1  the said order is said to have been passed considering the report of the. inquiry officer in respect of the charges levelled against the appellant. 1947  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ida1947243    for short. the act    inter alia stipulates that during the pendency of any proceedings. in respect of an industrial dispute  the employer may  in accordance with the. has been paid wages for one month and an application has been made by the. employer to the authority before which the proceedings are pending for. 1986  respondent no 1  as required by the aforesaid section  moved an. application dated 27th april  1987 before the industrial tribunal seeking. approval of the order of dismissal  the said application was registered as. miscellaneous case no  7 of 1988   it was resisted by the appellant  in reply. the appellant inter alia disputed that he was paid one months wages as. required by section 6  e 2  b  of the act  an application was also moved by. the appellant before the industrial tribunal stating that he has not been paid. hra as well as cca which was payable to him and  therefore  the employer has. not paid to him full month wages payable under section 6 e 2  b. after the dismissal order was made  the appellant raised an industrial dispute. challenging his dismissal and the state government made a reference under. section 4 k of the act for adjudication of the said dispute by the industrial. tribunal  this was registered as adjudication case no  31 of 1988  the dispute. referred was as follows  whether dismissal order dated 24th april  1987 passed. by the employer against workman hari dutt sharma  son of kishan chand sharma. other details   respondent no 1  by its application dated 31st january  1990. sought permission of the industrial tribunal to withdraw the approval. application  the said application was dismissed by the industrial tribunal by. order dated 29th june  1990. the order dated 29th june  1990 was challenged by respondent no 1 in a writ. petition filed in the high court. by impugned judgment dated 11th february  1998  learned single judge of the. high court has set aside the order of the tribunal dated 29th june  1990 and. has directed the tribunal to allow the withdrawal of the application filed. the only reason given by the high court for setting aside the order of the. remand the matter to high court for fresh decision of the writ petition  we. considered by the industrial tribunal.
[Ratio of the decision] approval of the action taken by the employer  on account of pendency of. industrial disputes in reference proceedings in adjudication case no  53 of. general clerk cum duplicating machine operator is legal and or justified  if. not  then to what benefit relief the workman is entitled for and with any. tribunal is that two parallel proceedings   one under section 6 e 2  b  and. the other on reference under section 4 k of the act relating to same matter. cannot be allowed to continue and that the point raised in the application. under section 6 e 2  b  can be agitated and finally disposed of in a more. effective manner if the proceedings are taken on the basis of application. under section 4 k of the act. we are unable to sustain the aforesaid reasons given by the high court  the. scope of proceedings under the two provisions is substantially different. and other on reference under section 4 k of the act cannot be continued at the. same time  we do not have the benefit of the viewpoint of the high court on. various grounds stated by the tribunal in the order declining permission to. respondent no 1 to withdraw the approval application  since we propose to. refrain from expressing any opinion on the reasons given in the order of the. tribunal dated 29th june  1990 which have not been dealt by the high court nor. do we consider it appropriate to express opinion at this stage on the. consequences of withdrawal of the approval application or prayer for such. withdrawal can be declined or not  in short  we keep open all questions.

[Facts] this appeal is against an order passed by the industrial court on 20th august. 1996  briefly stated the facts are as follows  the appellants claim to be a. union representing the workmen of a canteen run by the respondents  the. appellant union claimed that even though the appellants are actually the. employees of the respondents  the respondents are not treating them at par. with other employees and have notionally engaged contractors to run the. canteen  as the respondents were not accepting the appellants  claim to treat. them as their employees  the appellant filed a complaint under section 28 1. of the maharashtra recognition of trade unions   prevention of unfair labour. practices act  1971  hereinafter called the mrtu   pulp act  alleging that the. respondents had engaged in unfair labour practices under item nos  1  1 a. 1 b   4  4 a  of schedule ii and items 3  5  6  7  9 and 10 of schedule iv of. the mrtu   pulp act  this complaint came to be dismissed by the impugned order. dated 20th august  1996. the appellant union has filed an slp directly in this court against this order. as the high court of bombay  in the case of krantikari suraksha rakshak. sangathana v  s  v  naik reported in  1993  1 clr page 1002  has already held. that the industrial court cannot in a complaint under mrtu   pulp act abolish. contract labour and treat employees as direct employees of the company  at.
[Ratio of the decision] agreement with the above mentioned view  the provisions of mrtu   pulp act can. only be enforced by persons who admittedly are workmen. if there is dispute as to whether the employees are employees of the company. then that dispute must first be got resolved by raising a dispute before the. appropriate forum  it is only after the status as a workmen is established in. an appropriate forum that a complaint could be made under the provisions of. mrtu   pulp act  faced with this situation it was submitted that the. respondent company had always recognised the members of the appellant union to. be their own workmen  it is submitted that a formal denial was taken only to. defeat the claim  we see no substance in this submission  in the written. statement it has been categorically denied that the members of the appellant. union were employees of the respondent company  the question has been agitated. before the industrial court  the industrial court has given a finding  on. facts  that the members of the appellant union were not employees of the. respondent company  this is a disputed fact and thus till the appellants or. their members  get the question decided in a proper forum  this complaint was. not maintainable. accordingly  we dismiss this appeal on the ground that the complaint was not. maintainable  we clarify that it is open for the appellant or their members to. raise dispute in this behalf before an appropriate forum provided they are. entitled to do so  if they get a declaration to the effect that they are. employees of the respondent company  then it may be open to them to file such. a complaint  it is also clarified that if a dispute as to their status is. raised in an appropriate forum then the same will be decided on merits without. taking into consideration any observations made or finding given by the. industrial court in the impugned order.

[Facts] tenants individually  m s  india umbrella manufacturing company  the appellant. pursuant to the order passed in the partition case  partition patta no 1382. with dag nos  2435  2436  2437  2438  2439  2400 and 2484 was issued in the. name of bhagabandei and partition patta no  1064 with dag nos  2327  2379. 2339  2333  2386 and 2387 was issued in the name of buchi devi. the land was thus partitioned  the two sisters did not consider it necessary. to have the structure of house standing over the land also partitioned by. metes and bounds inasmuch as they had mutually agreed to demolish the. superstructure and then to construct their separate houses on their respective. pieces of land which had fallen to their respective shares pursuant to the. land partition proceedings. to the extent of what has been stated hereinabove the facts are not disputed. the co owner and co landlady sisters joined together in filing suits for. ejectment of the two tenants  the two landladies pleaded that they did not. have any other house of their own and on being vacated by the tenants the. present structure was to be demolished and on reconstruction used for their. own occupation  the tenants were alleged to have defaulted in payment of rent. and then fallen into arrears  there was also allegation of creation of sub. tenancy  the trial court found the plaintiffs not entitled to the decree for. eviction and directed the suits to be dismissed vide judgment and decree dated. 30 4 1981. presumably disheartened by the dismissal of the suit  buchi devi transferred. by registered deed of sale dated 12 6 1981  her share in the suit house to. chand ratan swami  gopi krishna swami  indra devi and vijay lakshmi  who were. partners of m s  india umbrella manufacturing company carrying on business in. the suit premises as one of the tenants. subsequent to the sale  bhagabandei alone filed appeals laying challenge to. the dismissal of the suits  buchi devi  having lost her interest in preferring. and prosecuting the appeals  was impleaded as a proforma respondent. the purchasers of buchi devi s share in the suit property were also joined as. parties to the appeal  during the pendency of the appeal  on 5 7 82  the. buyers of the share of buchi devi filed an application in the appeal. submitting that they were not interested in the ejectment of the tenants so. far as their share in the property is concerned and prayed for the suit being. dismissed  another application was filed by the tenant submitting that right. to evict vests in the co landlords and as one of them had transferred away her. rights and the transferees were not interested in pursuing eviction  the. appeal was incompetent and hence liable to be dismissed  on 23 3 83  the. learned district judge allowed the appeal by a common judgment in the two. appeals arising out of the two suits and directed decrees for eviction to be. passed holding the availability of all the three grounds for ejectment in. favour of the appellant namely bona fide need  default in payment of rent and. subletting of the premises  as to the application dated 5 7 82 filed by buchi. devi s transferees and the other application filed by the tenant  respondent. the learned district judge opined that they were of no consequence  however. in the operative part of the judgment  the learned district judge added a. rider  he directed that inasmuch as some of the partners of the tenant firm. m s  india umbrella manufacturing company have purchased the rights of buchi. was being paid till then  thus  in substance  it appears that the learned. district judge has found the interest of the landlords in the suit house to. the extent of one half  i e  owned by buchi devi  having vested in the. partners of one of the tenants firm m s  india umbrella manufacturing company. and therefore the tenancy having been extinguished to the extent of one half. by merger but continuing to the extent of one half equivalent to the share. owned by bhagabandei  the other tenant was directed to be ejected. feeling aggrieved by the appellate judgment  the two tenants preferred two. civil revisions in the high court  in the civil revisions the buyers pendente. lite reiterated their stand that they were not interested in seeking eviction. with the tenant m s  india umbrella manufacturing company  the partners. therein  who had purchased the share of buchi devi  also joined as revision. petitioners  both the revision petitions have been dismissed. these two appeals by special leave have been filed by the two tenants joining. the buyers of one half share belonging to buchi devi also as appellants  the. landlords have not chosen to file any appeal against that part of the judgment. of the high court which has upheld the judgment of the appellate court putting. an embargo on the right of the plaintiff decree  holder to execute the decree. india umbrella manufacturing company as tenants  until the suit house is. both the appeals are dismissed with costs throughout  the judgment and decrees. of the appellate court maintained by the high court are confirmed  however  in.
[Ratio of the decision] in civil appeal no  5357 of 1996  agreed to continue to hold the tenancy. premises on a monthly rent of rs 1200   undertaking to pay rs 600   each to. the two co owners  m s  bharat stores   agencies through its proprietor. tulsiram swami  who and whose alleged sub tenants are the appellants in civil. appeal no  5358 of 1996  agreed to continue in possession of the tenancy. premises on a monthly rent of rs 500   undertaking to pay rs 250   to each of. the two co owners separately  thus  though the property was undivided and. jointly owned by the two sisters  the rent agreed upon by the two tenants was. by consent apportioned in equal shares between the two co owner landladies. in the year 1971 72  the two co owners namely bhagabandei and buchi devi. initiated proceedings for partition of land in case no 63 of 1971 72 under the. local law governing the partition of land holdings. devi in the house property they were not liable to be ejected unless and until. the house property has been partitioned between the two co owners  though they. would continue to pay rent to bhagabandei in the same proportion in which it. for eviction from that part of the property which is in possession of m s. partitioned amicably or through court. having heard the learned counsel for the parties we are satisfied that the. appeals are liable to be dismissed  it is well settled that one of the co. owners can file a suit for eviction of a tenant in the property generally para. 25   this principle is based on the doctrine of agency  one co owner filing a. suit for eviction against the tenant does so on his own behalf in his own. right and as an agent of the other co owners  the consent of other co  owners. is assumed as taken unless it is shown that the other co owners were not. agreeable to eject the tenant and the suit was filed in spite of their. disagreement  in the present case  the suit was filed by both the co owners. one of the co owners cannot withdraw his consent midway the suit so as to. prejudice the other co owner  the suit once filed  the rights of the parties. stand crystallised on the date of the suit and the entitlement of the co. owners to seek ejectment must be adjudged by reference to the date of. subsequent event the entitlement of the body of co owners to eject the tenant. comes to an end by act of parties or by operation of law. buchi devi had willingly joined with bhagabandei in filing the suit. during the continuity of litigation she parted with her share in the property. one out of the two tenants purchased her share  it seems that the tenancy is. in the name of a partnership firm and some of the partners have purchased the. share of bhagabandei  it is not clear if all the partners or only a few out of. all the partners are the buyers  the fact remains that they have purchased. only a share in the property and not the entire property  the applicability of. doctrine of merger within the meaning of clause  d  of section 111 of the. transfer of property act. 1882  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act topa1882258   is not. attracted  in order to bring the tenancy to an end the merger should be. complete  i e  the interest of the landlord in its entirety must come to vest. and merge into the interest of tenant in its entirety  when part of the. interest of the landlord or the interest of one out of many co landlords cum. co owners comes to vest in the tenant  there is no merger and the tenancy is. not extinguished  in our opinion  the first appellate court was not justified. in placing a rider on the right of the decree holders to execute the decree. unless the property was partitioned between the co owners  however  we need. not dwell much upon this aspect as that part of the decree has achieved a. finality as the landlords have not pursued their challenge to the decree of. the first appellate court by filing special leave petitions in this court. the decree  in so far as the other tenant and sub tenants i e  the appellants. in c a  no 5358 1996 are concerned  has to be sustained  the partners of the. other tenant firm i e  m s  india umbrella manufacturing co   appellant in. c a  no 5357 1996  have purchased the property pendente lite and therefore. they cannot be allowed to take a stand contrary to the one taken by their. predecessor in interest and to the prejudice of the other plaintiff whose. rights they have not purchased  their filing an application that they were not. interested in securing eviction of the other tenant is in the facts and. circumstances of the case immaterial and irrelevant. in order to cut short further litigation we are inclined to invoke the. jurisdiction vesting in this court under article 142 of the constitution  as. noted in the earlier part of the judgment  the land standing below the. structure has been partitioned  the need for partitioning the super structure. standing over the land was not felt by the co owner landlords as the super. structure was just debris in their assessment as they had decided to demolish. the same and reconstruct the property separately on their respective pieces of. land falling to their respective shares by virtue of partition  in the absence. of the super structure having been actually partitioned it can be assumed that. the super structure would go with the land and each of the co owners would  in. any case  be entitled to that part of the super structure which corresponds. with the land underneath as fallen to the separate shares of the two  the. decree for eviction in favour of the heirs of bhagabandei  who has died during. the pendency of the proceedings and whose heirs have come on record  as. against the judgment debtors sekhar chand swami  smt  chanda devi swami and. m s  bharat stores   agency shall be available for execution and the tenants. shall be liable to be evicted from that part of the house and super structure. as corresponds with the share of the land which has fallen to the share of. bhagabandei. during the pendency of this appeal  we had directed  vide order dated. 11 9 2003  the parties to explore possibility of settlement  if any  and also. to draw an agreed map of the property showing the house property divided into. two portions indicated in separate colours  so as to point out that part of. the property to which the heirs of bhagabandei would be entitled and that part. of the property to which buchi devi and now her transferees  pendente lite. would be entitled  unfortunately  the parties have not been able to draw an. agreed map  both the parties have filed their separate maps  on a perusal of. the two maps  we do not find any substantial difference therein  out of the. two maps we find the one drawn by m s  gautam baruah   associates on 26 9 2003. and filed by the plaintiff landlords to be comparatively more accurate and. clear  that map shall be transmitted to the trial court and shall form part of. the decree. order to save the tenants from the peril of sudden eviction it is directed. that the decree for eviction shall not be available for execution for a period. of three months from today subject to the tenant  appellants filing an usual. undertaking and clearing the entire money part of the decree by making deposit. decree therewith.

[Facts] the same person contending that the order of the magistrate should have been. the complaint was filed by the second respondent  mahesh patidar  before the. chief judicial magistrate  neemuch  m p   on 12 8 1999 alleging that the. appellant and his wife geeta devi have committed offence under section 3 of. the prized chits and money circulation scheme  prohibition  act and under. section 420 of the indian penal code  the chief judicial magistrate passed an. order on 18 8 1999 which is extracted below  the complaint submitted by the. complainant has been perused  this complaint has been submitted by the. complainant for initiating action against the accused under section 3 of the. be investigated by the police station  nemuch cantt  under section 156 3. cr p c   therefore  the complaint submitted by the complainant be sent to the. and initiate investigation  the copy of the f i r  and initiate investigation. the copy of the f i r  be sent to this court immediately. appellant challenged the said order in a revision before the sessions court. and when the revision was dismissed he moved the high court under section 482. of the code of criminal procedure  for short the code   learned single judge. of the high court of madhya pradesh took the view that in a private complaint. case under section 156 3  of the code the magistrate is empowered to order. investigation  the allegation made in the complaint needs to be investigated. in public interest. any order regarding police investigation without examining the complainant on. thereafter can end up only with the report filed by the police as indicated in. commenced by the police even without the order of a magistrate  but that does. not mean that when a magistrate orders an investigation under section 156 3. taken cognizance of the offence on the complaint filed before him  he was not. following the correct position  were asked by the learned judge to follow the. erroneous position formulated by him in the aforesaid judgment.
[Ratio of the decision] persons arrayed in the complaint as accused questioned the legality of the. above order first in revision before the sessions court and then by invoking. the inherent powers of the high court  both did not succeed  this appeal is by. upset in the interest of justice. prizes  chits and money circulation scheme  prohibition  act and section 420. of the ipc  both the offences are serious  therefore  the case is required to. the former decision of the rajasthan high court need not vex our mind as the. then the observation cannot be faulted with  that apart  as the point involved. in this case is different we do not think it necessary to examine the said. decision  but the other decision rendered by a single judge of the punjab and. haryana high court  suresh kumar vs  state of haryana  has gone a step further. as he held that the magistrate has no power within the contemplation of. stage to make the enquiry in the matter enabling the magistrate to apply his. mind with regard to the correctness of the complaint  in that decision learned. single judge  at the end of the judgment  made a direction as follows  before. parting with the judgment  it is observed that often it is found that the. judicial magistrates working under the control of this court many a time upon. the complaints preferred before them  allegedly showing that a cognizable. offence has been committed by the accused  direct the police to register and. conduct the investigation in such cases under section 156 3  of the cr p c. after the reports are received from the police the magistrates deal with those. cases as police challans and conduct the proceedings in the matters against. the provisions of law as discussed above. hence the registry is directed to send a copy of this judgment to all the. judicial magistrates in the states of punjab  haryana and union territory. chandigarh  for information and guidance. in our opinion  the aforesaid direction given by the learned single judge of. the punjab and haryana high court in suresh kumar vs  state of haryana  supra. is contrary to law and cannot be approved  chapter xii of the code contains. provisions relating to information to the police and their powers to. investigate  whereas chapter xv  which contains section 202  deals with. provisions relating to the steps which a magistrate has to adopt while and. after taking cognizance of any offence on a complaint  provisions of the above. two chapters deal with two different facets altogether though there could be a. as above mentioned. the investigation referred to therein is the same investigation the various. steps to be adopted for it have been elaborated in chapter xii of the code. such investigation would start with making the entry in a book to be kept by. the officer in charge of a police station  of the substance of the information. relating to the commission of a cognizable offence  the investigation started. section 173 of the code  the investigation contemplated in that chapter can be. it would be a different kind of investigation  such investigation must also. end up only with the report contemplated in section 173 of the code. but the significant point to be noticed is  when a magistrate orders. investigation under chapter xii he does so before he takes cognizance of the. offence. but a magistrate need not order any such investigation if he proposes to take. cognizance of the offence  once he. jjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjj takes cognizance. of the offence he has to follow the procedure envisaged in chapter xv of the. code  a reading of section 202 1  of the code would convince that the. not there is sufficient ground for proceeding  this is because he has already. taken cognizance of the offence disclosed in the complaint  and the domain of. the case would thereafter vest with him. the position is thus clear  any judicial magistrate  before taking cognizance. of the offence  can order investigation under section 156 3  of the code  if. he does so  he is not to examine the complainant on oath because he was not. taking cognizance of any offence therein  for the purpose of enabling the. police to start investigation it is open to the magistrate to direct the. police to register an fir  there is nothing illegal in doing so  after all. registration of an fir involves only the process of entering the substance of. the information relating to the commission of the cognizable offence in a book. kept by the officer in  charge of the police station as indicated in section. 154 of the code  even if a magistrate does not say in so many words while. directing investigation under section 156 3  of the code that an fir should be. registered  it is the duty of the officer in charge of the police station to. register the fir regarding the cognizable offence disclosed by the complaint. because that police officer could take further steps contemplated in chapter. xii of the code only thereafter. learned judges repelled the contention that the magistrate ought to have. examined the complainant on oath under section 200 of the code  dealing with. the said contention their lordships stated thus  if the magistrate had not. obliged to examine the complainant on oath and the witnesses present at the. time of the filing of the complaint  we cannot read the provisions of s 190 to. mean that once a complaint is filed  a magistrate is bound to take cognizance. if the facts stated in the complaint disclose the commission of any offence. we are unable to construe the word may in section 190 to mean must  the reason. is obvious  a complaint disclosing cognizable offences may well justify a. magistrate in sending the complaint  under s 156 3  to the police for. investigation  there is no reason why the time of the magistrate should be. wasted when primarily the duty to investigate in cases involving cognizable. offences is with the police  on the other hand  there may be occasions when. the magistrate may exercise his discretion and take cognizance of a cognizable. offence.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. lawcite   cgi bin lawcite  cit 2004 insc 15. civil appeal no  17 04    slp  c  no  17837 01  civil appeal no  18 04    slp. c  no  18027 01  civil appeal no  20 04    slp  c  no  5220 02  civil appeal. 6050 02  civil appeal no  21 04    slp  c  no  6051 02  v n  khare  cji. leave granted. the motor accident claims tribunal  ludhiana  hereinafter referred to as  the. claims tribunal    in view of the death of her sixteen year old son. sukhwinder singh  due to the allegedly reckless driving by the second. respondent and driver of the goods vehicle  bearing number pb 10u 8937  on. february 19  1999  it was found by the claims tribunal that the victim  who. was returning in the truck from a marriage ceremony  died as a result of the. rash and negligent driving by the driver of the goods vehicle  the second. respondent herein  it was an admitted fact that the said vehicle was insured. with the appellant insurance company. the claims tribunal relying upon the decision of this court in new india. assurance co  v  satpal singh   2000  1 scc 237   cgi. bin lawcite cit  282000 29 201 20scc 20237   accepted the claim petition  and. rejected the contention of the appellant insurance company that the concerned. vehicle being a goods vehicle  it would not have to incur any liability with. respect to passengers transported in the vehicle  it further directed the. appellant to pay an amount of rs 1 32 000   as compensation  with interest at. the rate of 9  from the date of application  the high court upheld the verdict. of the claims tribunal on appeal  with the further direction that in the event. the owner  the third respondent herein  had committed any breach  the. appellant insurer would be entitled to recover the amount of compensation from. him.
[Ratio of the decision] the question that arises for consideration in these appeals is whether an. insurance policy in respect of a goods vehicle would also cover gratuitous. legislative intent to provide for third party risk  the question in the. subsequent judgment in oriental present case  the liability of the insurance. third respondents  the driver and owner of the vehicle respectively  that the. decision in asha rani case  supra  and konda reddy case  supra  were delivered. legislative amendment was not in question in the above cases  and therefore. the law laid down by these decisions would not be considered as binding law in. view of coming into force of the said amendment  since the accident in the. present instance occurred in 1999  this court would now have to consider. afresh the impact of the 1994 amendment  and could not consider itself. circumscribed by the aforementioned decisions in the asha rani case  supra. and konda reddy case  supra  which both involved motor accidents predating the. said amendment. it is the submission of the respondent vehicle owner and driver that the. insertion  by way of legislative amendment  of the words  including owner of. the goods or his authorized representative carried in the vehicle  in section. 147 would result in the inference that gratuitous passengers would as well be. covered by the scope of the provision  any other construction  it was urged by. any person  including owner of the goods or his authorized representative. carried in the vehicle or damage to any property of a third party caused by or. arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place. ii          emphasis added  admittedly  it is incumbent upon a court of law. to eschew that interpretation of a statute that would serve to negate its true. import  or to render the words of any provision as superfluous  nonetheless. we find no merit in the above submissions proffered by the learned counsel for. the respondent  the effect of the 1994 amendment on section 147 is. unambiguous  where earlier  the words  any person  could be held not to. include the owner of the goods or his authorized representative travelling in. the goods vehicle  parliament has now made it clear that such a construction. is no longer possible  the scope of this rationale does not  however  extend. to cover the class of cases where gratuitous passengers for whom no insurance. policy was envisaged  and for whom no insurance premium was paid  employ the. goods vehicle as a medium of conveyance. we find ourselves unable  furthermore  to countenance the contention of the. respondents that the words  any person  as used in section 147 of the  motor. vehicles act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act mva1988172. would be rendered otiose by an interpretation that removed gratuitous. passengers from the ambit of the same  it was observed asha rani  supra  that. the true purport of the words  any person  is to be found in the liability of. the insurer for third party risk  which was sought to be provided for by the. enactment. it is pertinent to note that a statutory liability enjoined upon an owner of. the vehicle to compulsorily insure it so as to cover the liability in respect. of a person who was travelling in a vehicle pursuant to a contract of. employment in terms of proviso  ii  appended to section 95 of the 1939 act. does not occur in section 147 of the 1988 act  the changes effected in the. 1988 act vis   vis the 1939 act as regard definitions of  goods vehicle. public service vehicle  and  stage carriage  have also a bearing on the. subject inasmuch as the concept of any goods carriage carrying any passenger. or any other person was not contemplated. in a situation of this nature  the doctrine of suppression of mischief rule as. that whereas the goods carriage carrying any passenger is not contemplated. under the 1988 act as the same must be used solely for carrying the goods. 1  what was the common law before the making of the act. 2  what was the mischief and defect for which the common law did not provide. 3  what remedy parliament has resolved and appointed to cure the disease of. the commonwealth  and  4  the true reason of the remedy  and then the office. of all the judges is always to make such construction as shall. a  suppress the mischief and advance the remedy  and  b  suppress subtle. inventions and evasions for the continuance of the mischief pro privato. commodo  for private benefit   and  c  add force and life to the cure and. remedy according to the true intent of the makers of the act pro publico  for. the public good    heydon s rule has been applied by this court in a large. number of cases in order to suppress the mischief which was intended to be. remedied as against the literal rule which could have otherwise covered the. field   see for example  smt  pek kalliani amma and others vs  k  devi and. others    1996  insc. by reason of the 1994 amendment what was added is  including the owner of the. goods or his authorised representative carried in the vehicle. the liability of the owner of the vehicle to insure it compulsorily  thus  by. reason of the aforementioned amendment included only the owner of the goods or. his authorised representative carried in the vehicle besides the third. parties  the intention of the parliament  therefore  could not have been that. 26  in view of the changes in the relevant provisions in the 1988 act. vis   vis the 1939 act  we are of the opinion that the meaning of the words. any person  must also be attributed having regard to the context in which. they have been used i e   a third party   keeping in view the provisions of. the 1988 act  we are of the opinion that as the provisions thereof do not. enjoin any statutory liability on the owner of a vehicle to get his vehicle. insured for any passenger traveling in a goods vehicle  the insurers would not. be liable therefor   in asha rani  supra   it has been noticed that sub clause. i  of clause  b  of sub section  1  of section 147 of the 1988 act speaks of. liability which may be incurred by the owner of a vehicle in respect of death. of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third party. caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place. furthermore  an owner of a passenger carrying vehicle must pay premium for. covering the risks of the passengers travelling in the vehicle  the premium in. view of the 1994 amendment would only cover a third party as also the owner of. the goods or his authorised representative and not any passenger carried in a. goods vehicle whether for hire or reward or otherwise. it is therefore  manifest that in spite of the amendment of 1994  the effect. of the provision contained in section 147 with respect to persons other than. the owner of the goods or his authorized representative remains the same. although the owner of the goods or his authorized representative would now be. covered by the policy of insurance in respect of a goods vehicle  it was not. the intention of the legislature to provide for the liability of the insurer. with respect to passengers  especially gratuitous passengers  who were neither. contemplated at the time the contract of insurance was entered into  nor any. premium was paid to the extent of the benefit of insurance to such category of. people. the upshot of the aforementioned discussions is that instead and in place of. the insurer the owner of the vehicle shall be liable to satisfy the decree. the question  however  would be as to whether keeping in view the fact that. the law was not clear so long such a direction would be fair and equitable  we. do not think so  we  therefore  clarify the legal position which shall have. prospective effect  the tribunal as also the high court had proceeded in terms. of the decisions of this court in satpal singh  supra. the said decision has been overruled only in asha rani  supra. we  therefore  are of the opinion that the interest of justice will be sub. served if the appellant herein is directed to satisfy the awarded amount in. favour of the claimant if not already satisfied and recover the same from the. owner of the vehicle  for the purpose of such recovery  it would not be. necessary for the insurer to file a separate suit but it may initiate a. proceeding before the executing court as if the dispute between the insurer. and the owner was the subject matter of determination before the tribunal and. the issue is decided against the owner and in favour of the insurer  we have. issued the aforementioned directions having regard to the scope and purport of. section 168 of the  motor vehicles act. 1988  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act mva1988172   in terms. whereof it is not only entitled to determine the amount of claim as put forth. by the claimant for recovery thereof from the insurer  owner or driver of the. vehicle jointly or severally but also the dispute between the insurer on the. one hand and the owner or driver of the vehicle involved in the accident. inasmuch as can be resolved by the tribunal in such a proceeding.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. recurring grants  the recommendations of the university education commission. were approved by the central adversory board of education at its meeting in. april  1950  and the government of west bengal agree to the establishment of a. santiniketan admeasuring 3000 hectares bounded on the north by the kopai. river  on the west by a line running from ballavpur and bonuri villages to. bandgora  on the south by a line running from bandgora via bolpur dak bungalow. to the bridge over the eastrn railway cutting  and  on the east by the eastern. railway line. public interest litigation. the appellants herein who are residents of santiniketan filed a public. interest litigation before the calcutta high court aggrieved by the continuing. process of defacement of the ambiance and environment which was destroying the. very ideals and purpose for which visva bharati was conceived and founded by. residential  cum  commercial complexes by developers and promoters in utter. disregard of  inter alia  environmental and pollution control laws and. requirements which had endangered the very purpose  tradition and objective. with which visva bharati was established and which was thereafter sought to be. preserved by the act  the appellants herein who are in particular aggrieved by. proposed constructions which are likely to come up in the area known as khoai. housing board  a body corporate formed under the west bengal housing board. act  1972 and gujarat ambuja cements ltd  having equal participation of. which in very much needed in the area  unauthorised structures on the plot. have been mostly removed but still some of them exist  revenue to be received. by ssda out of this project is to be utilized for carrying out various other. projects for public purpose  ssda has undertaken various works of public. benefit  several roads have been developed project for supply of potable water. has been undertaken and has been substantially implemented  further. implementation in other area is also under process  genuine residents of. santiniketan will be benefited out of the said works undertaken by ssda   high. court. a division bench of the high court dismissed the said public interest. litigation holding that the university being not the owner of the entire 3000. acres of land no relief can be granted  while arriving at the said finding  it. was opined. i   if it is not vishwabharati s special dominion land for setting up. acquired for its purpose  and  thus  the writ petition filed by the appellant.
[Ratio of the decision] the act. the parliament with a view to preserve and protect the uniqueness  tradition. constituted as an unitary  teaching and residential university with a view to. preserve the tradition and special features of the institution  as would. unitary  teaching and residential university at santiniketan by an act of. parliament. 3   there is no provision in the constitution of india for the grant of a. charter  as distinct from an act  as recommended by the university education. commission  but the constitution makes the union government responsible for. institutions declared by law to be of national importance  vide item 63 of. list i of the seventh schedule to the constitution. 4   it is  therefore  proposed to make such a declaration and have the visva. bharati constituted as a central university  the constitution that is proposed. to be given to visva bharati is in conformity with the recommendations made by. the university education commission with such modifications as are considered. necessary to preserve the tradition and special features of the institution. section 4 of the act provides for incorporation of the university  the object. of the university in terms of section 5a thereof was to disseminate and. advance knowledge and understanding by providing instructional  extension and. research facilities and by the example and influence of its corporate life. and in organizing its activities  have due regard to the objects specified. therein for which the visva bharati at santiniketan was founded by. rabindranath tagore  as expressed in his own words including  to see to. realize in a common fellowship of study the meeting of the east and the west. and thus ultimately to strengthen the fundamental conditions of world peace. through the establishment of free communication of ideas between the two. hemispheres. section 5b provides for the principles to be followed in organizing the. from time to time  for the development of healthy corporate life in the. university and to abolish any such bhavana school  chatravasa  gymnasium or. other institution. 7  to establish  at any place in india  campuses  special centres. specialized laboratories or other units for research and instruction as are. in the opinion of the university  necessary for the furtherance of its. objects. 9  to undertake the promotion of adult education  rural reconstruction  co. operative organizations  social welfare  development of cottage industries and. all other nation building activities and works for the benefit of the public. 32  to establish campuses within the territorial limits of the university. specified in the second schedule   by reason of section 7 of the act  the. powers of the university conferred by or under this act shall be restricted to. tagore  such encroachment upon the ambiance is said to have been committed by. reason of indiscriminate constructions and in particular construction of. being land created in the natural process through running rain water for. millennia which is a rare natural phenomenon and which  if destroyed  cannot. be restored even with the help of science and  thus  requires preservation. approached the high court in the said proceedings. town and country  planning and development  act  1979 to provide for the. planned development of rural and urban areas in west bengal and for matters. connected therewith or incidental thereto. the state of west bengal claims to be owner of the lands situated at. santiniketan being vested in it under section 4 of the west bengal estate. acquisition act  1953  it is  however  not disputed that 1761 acres of land. according to sriniketan santiniketan development authority  ssda   1127 acres. territorial jurisdiction for the sole purpose of academic activities and. section 7 of the act must be interpreted accordingly  academic territorial. jurisdiction  according to respondents  would not confer any title thereupon. in the university  the area which was in contemplation of rabindranath tagore. is said to be known as the  deer park area  as in 1870  i e   around the time. when the said composition was made there was only one barrage or bandh  in. santiniketan  which is still in existence and is known as  lal bandh   a. decision to develop the said area was taken whereupon a land use map was. minimum distance of 250 meters of visva bharati area and in terms of the land. use and development plan no development is permitted within 50 metres outside. the boundary of visva bharati university  in its counter affidavit  ssda. contended. respects  had the project not being undertaken the said plot would be occupied. by encroachers and unautorised buildings constructed by them  areas nearby. have been encroached upon by private persons and buildings have been. campuses as and when it so will  then the state has authority to deal with the. same in accordance with law  because there are no other objectors  it is not. illegal to set up reasonably peaceful activities or abodes of citizens  near. or even very near  universities    ii   that the continued increase of. population in santiniketan and the continued increase of building activity. there  will slowly change the place almost beyond the recognition of the poet. if he were to be alive even today  cannot be disputed    iii   the act. contains no indication that by reason of any spirit of the act  or the spirit. of the poet  santiniketan is to be made into such an exclusive spot forever. iv   moreover  assuming that the building activity is to take place only in. accordance with the spirit and ideas of the poet  rabindra nath tagore  how. we ask ourselves  is such activity to be monitored in the practical world. will every builder make an application first to the vishwabharati university. seeking permission  will every such case of permission ultimately travel to. the public interest litigation court  for us to decide ultimately whether the. building activity would be in keeping with the old ideas of the old. santiniketan  in our opinion  this is an unreasonable and  therefore  an. illegal and an impractical way of thought  the building activity can be. mentioned and controlled only if some law says that it is to be so monitored. and controlled  and also lays down specific ways in which such restrictions. are to be imposed by specified or named authorities  none of the laws shown to. us prevents the bengal ambuja project    v   we are of the opinion that the. bengal ambuja housing complex will  to that extent  change the topography of. santiniketan in the canal front but that there is no public interest which. calls for restraint of such a change  in our opinion  the university. activities can go on with substantially the same amount of vigour and benefit. to mankind whether we are aware that we are going a long way in saying this. but still we do state this to do so  the santiniketan outside the university. becomes a residential town or even an industrial town  provided the growth is. planned  systematic and in accordance with the laws relating to freedom from. population   submissions. issues raised in the writ petition must be considered having regard to the. purposes for which the act was enacted and having regard to its preamble and. the statement of its objects and reasons  activities going against the tenor. the said act  mr  sorabjee would contend  should not be permitted. were to be alive even today as fallacious inasmuch postulate such activities. which the act intends to prevent  comparison of the said university with other. entire santiniketan which will itself be in public interest  if by reason of. the activities  the character of the place sought to be preserved by the act. is changed beyond recognition and topography of santiniketan itself is. affected thereby  the court should invoke the doctrine of  implied. prohibition  for giving a true meaning of the act  our attention in this. connection has been drawn to a report of the west bengal pollution control. construction activities carried out by m s  bengal peerless housing. development company but it would appear therefrom that the site of development. having regard to the fact that the state has the exclusive legislative. competence as regard town planning  the parliamentary act cannot interdict in. the areas covered by the state act. contemplated under section 7 thereof are affected  the university itself. having not claimed any ownership in respect of the land beyond what had been. as shri a c  guha put it during the parliamentary debate on the bill  visva. bharati is a  symbol of our culture   during the parliamentary debate  maulana. form of brick and stone   pandit jawaharlal nehru said   and i entirely agree. with dr  mookerjee when he laid stress on certain factors that may be called. external if you like  but  nevertheless  which must have a very powerful. influence in moulding the student there and creating a new environment. whether it is teaching in the mango grove or doing anything like that  i. entirely agree with him that we should not spend our money on a large number. of brick structures as we unfortunately still do in making our buildings. whether educational buildings or other buildings  and have little left to. carry on the work in those buildings. the act was enacted with the consent of the state of west bengal. the state  having regard to the purport and object of the act  has  thus  a. duty to see that the environmental ambiance which would not be in consonance. with the ideals of visva bharati should not be undertaken. visva bharati is sui generis  it is an institution of national importance  it. is a unitary teaching and residential university  the jurisdiction of the. university is not only confined to the area specified in the second schedule. the provisions of the act and in particular sections 5a  6  7 and the second. schedule thereof must be conjointly read with the preamble and the statement. of objects and reasons thereof. determination the division bench of the high court  as noticed hereinbefore. arrived at a finding that the continued increase of building activities will. slowly change the place almost beyond recognition of the poet and the. activities of bengal ambuja housing complex ltd  will to some extent change. the topography of santiniketan in the canal front  despite holding so  the. high court observed that such changes are necessary having regard to the. continued increase in population of santiniketan and  as the act does not. contain any provision santiniketan was required to be made an exclusive spot. forever and  furthermore  as allowing the santiniketan in its original form. would be impractical  it can be permitted to become residential town or even. industrial town provided the growth is planned  systematic and in accordance. with the laws relating to freedom from population. if by reason of any activity  the tradition and special features of visva. bharati are not preserved  the very purpose of the enactment would be. defeated  it has not been denied or disputed that even now the visva bharati. organizes classes in open air and also on khoai lands  particularly  drawing. and painting classes. indisputably  changes are taking place everywhere in india but santiniketan. should maintain the tradition and special features of the visva bharati in. terms of the statutory scheme. what is being objected to by them is constructions of huge residential and. commercial complexes which even according to the high court would not only. change the topography but also would change the place almost beyond the. recognition of the poet. it may be true that the development of a town is the job of the town planning. authority but the same should conform to the requirements of law. development must be sustainable in nature  a land use plan should be prepared. not only having regard to the provisions contained in the 1979 act and the. rules and regulations framed thereunder but also the provisions of other. statues enacted therefor and in particular those for protection and. preservation of ecology and environment. as visva bharati has the unique distinction of being not only a university of. national importance but also a unitary one  the ssda should be well advised to. keep in mind the provisions of the act  the object and purpose for which it. has been enacted as also the report of the west bengal pollution control. board  it is sui generis. it is idle to compare shantiniketan with any other university  truism is that. shantiniketan has unique features  its environmental ambiance  thus  must be. maintained  there is no other university which having regard to the purport. and object of the act  as would appear from the objects and reasons thereof. can be compared with visva bharati  our attention has not been drawn to any. other statute establishing any university which has such unique features as. visva bharati. only because some advantages would ensue to the people in general by reason of. the proposed development  the same would not mean that the ecology of the. place would be sacrificed  only because some encroachments have been made and. unauthorized buildings have been constructed  the same by itself cannot be a. good ground for allowing other constructional activities to come up which. would be in violation of the provisions of the act  illegal encroachments  if. any  may be removed in accordance with law  it is trite law that thee is no. equality in illegality. the parliamentary debates  some of which we have noticed hereinbefore  clearly. go to show that the act was enacted with particular objectives in view  such. statutory objects could not have been given a go by  it is not suggested that. the santiniketan should remain as it was in 1921 but it cannot be permitted to. become full of concrete jungles and industrial hub  for carrying out further. constructional activities  it may not be necessary for a builder to apply to. the university for seeking its permission but the local self government which. is responsible therefor must take into consideration the salutary principles. laid down in the pollution control laws as well as the act  the land use and. future planning of santiniketan must be done in such a manner so that the. changes be brought about which would not be beyond the recognition of the poet. as also the provisions of the act. ssda in that sense must distinguish itself from the other development. authorities  it has an extra burden to shoulder  it cannot shut its eyes to. the provisions of the act and the object and purport it seeks to achieve  it. cannot ignore the environmental impact assessment made by the board  it is one. thing to say that the ssda may permit small constructions to be made by the. owners of the land or additions or allow alterations to the existing building. for residential purposes but it is another thing to say that it would not. consider the effect of the changes which may be brought about by turning. santiniketan into a commercial and industrial hub. we  with respect to the high court  are not in a position to agree with the. observations which clearly run counter to its own findings of fact. conclusion. the question is  what do we do in the instant case  ssda issued notices as. regard adoption of the land use map as far back as in the years 1999 and 2000. the state government had granted a long term settlement in favour of ssda with. a further right to the residential flat owners for the unexpired period of. lease by an order dated 25 4 2003  in 2003 itself  the project had been given. a green signal and it is stated before us that the respondent no  10 has. already spent about 1 5 crores of rupees. bengal peerless has already come into being  in that view of the matter  we do. not intend to stop the construction activities which are being carried out by. the respondent no  10 but direct that in future ssda must keep in mind the. statutory provisions referred to hereinbefore as also the observations made by.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. home        databases   databases html     worldlii  http   www worldlii org. search   forms search1 html     feedback   liiofindia feedback html. supreme court of india. you are here      liiofindia         databases   databases html      supreme court of india           2006            2006  insc 142. the above two appeals were filed against the final judgment and order dated. 10 01 2001 passed by the high court of judicature at madras in o s a  nos  309. and 350 of 2000 whereby the high court allowed both the appeals filed by. respondent nos. 1 and 2  namely  the commander  coast guard region  east   chennai and inter. cargo insurance company acting as underwriters and agents for t w  metals. limited  chennai  the owners of the vessel  nominator shipping corporation. monroviya liberia  chairman  madras port trust and deputy port conservator. pondicherry were also impleaded as proforma respondents in the above appeals. the appellants in this appeal are the crew men. the short facts of the case are as follows. the vessel named  kobe queen i also known as gloira kopp was registered in. panama with its crew members belonging to ukraine was spotted by the officers. of the customs department in the indian territorial waters  it was noticed by. the department that the vessel was loaded with steel products on 22 12 1999. on 24 12 1999  interim order arresting the vessel was passed and a receiver. was appointed for valuing the cargo and to take possession of it  on the same. day  the master of the ship committed suicide  the crew were kept under arrest. till 01 01 2000. due to the suit filed by the under writers for t w  metals ltd   the vessel. was towed to madras port  on 14 01 2000  the learned single judge of the. madras high court ordered for sale of ship  the appellant  o  konavalov  who. was the chief officer  filed an application no  633 2000 claiming wages from. out of the sale of the ship  the application was filed under order xiv rule 8. of the original side rules read with section 125 of the  merchant shipping. act  1958  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act msa1958185   praying. to direct the receiver to pay wages to crew members out of the proceeds of the. sale of the vessel  however  the coast guard moved the division bench of the. high court by way of osa no  42 2000 seeking the stay of the sale of the ship. in view of the pending investigations. respondent no 2 moved the division bench for withdrawing their claim of arrest. and sale of the vessel  the superintendent of customs  prevention   chennai. passed an order under section 110 of the customs act  placing the vessel and. cargo under seizure  they were placed in the custody of respondent no 1  the. above appeal was heard and allowed by the division bench of the high court. the high court noted the withdrawal of prayers by respondent no 2 and. permitted respondent no 1 coast guard to deal with the crew  vessel and the. cargo  the commissioner of customs issued a show cause notice to the chief. officer of the ship calling upon him to explain why the cargo cannot be. confiscated and penalty should not be imposed on the persons under section. 112 a  of the  customs act. 1962  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ca1962124    the counsel. for the crew sent a reply mentioning the non involvement of the crew in. dealing with any narcotics drugs and prayed that the crew be paid their wages. and the cargo be dealt with according to law. the appellant moved three fresh applications  which are  application nos. 590 2000  2449 2000 and 2450 2000  application no  2450 2000 was filed to pay. the wages from the sale proceeds of the cargo or alternatively a direction for. sale of the ship and pay the wages as a first charge  respondent no 1 filed a. counter affidavit contesting the applications  the respondents contested the. applications stating that the crew of the vessel has not filed any independent. on the vessel. the learned single judge of the high court passed an order in the above. applications directing the coast guard authorities and the customs authorities. to pay the wages lawfully due to the crew members on board of the ship and. that the crew should be deported to their country and that the expenses should. also be made by the government agencies out of the funds retained by them. applications  it was further held that it is the duty of the government. aggrieved by the above order  respondent nos  1 and 2 filed two appeals. namely  o s a  nos  309 and 350 of 2000 before the division bench of the high. court. the commissioner of customs  madras passed an order confiscating the vessel. aggrieved by the order of the division bench  the appellant preferred the. h  that the division bench failed to appreciate that the crew members were. suffering without wages from may  1999 till the time they were deported by the. opium were detected at various parts of the ship. b  that as there were no claimant for the cargo  after the process of law  the. 15 000 mt steel cargo was confiscated by the commissioner of customs and then. sold in public auction. c  that the owners had completely disowned the ship and were untraceable after. the government authorities detained the ship. d  that the auction of the steel cargo was held on july  2000 and the highest. bid was offered for rs 12 500   per mt. e  that the commissioner of customs  vide order dated 26 09 2000  confiscated. the vessel absolutely under section 115 2  of the  customs. act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ca1962124    the reasons. given were. i  unauthorised deviation from the route required for cargo discharge. ii  entry into indian territorial waters without intimating appropriate. authorities. the customs authorities then auctioned the confiscated ship. f  that the ship was purchased by m s chaudhary industries ship breakers on. auction and a sum of rs 18 75 crores was realised  since the vessel was used. as a means of transport of the said cargo  it was deemed to have smuggled the. cargo into the country and by virtue of the unauthorised entry on to indian. customs water and by not calling on at a specified port and not filing the. import manifest the said vessel was absolutely confiscated under section. 115 2  of the  customs act. 1962  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ca1962124   and was sold. later through tender sale for rs 2 36 crores to m s chaudhary industries. tenable  the division bench of the high court reaches the said conclusion on. the basis of the proposition that the confiscation of the goods are. for release of the vessel. judicial opinion and text book writers hold that a maritime lien such as. on the goods and so long as his claim was not satisfied no other creditor of. the pawnor had any right to take away the goods or its price. after the goods had been seized by the government it was bound to pay the. amount due to the plaintiff and the balance could have been made available to. satisfy the claim of other creditor of the pawnor  but by a mere act of lawful. seizure the government could not deprive the plaintiff of the amount which was. secured by the pledge of the goods to it  as the act of the government. resulted in deprivation of the amount to which the plaintiff was entitled it. was bound to reimburse the plaintiff for such amount which the plaintiff in. ordinary course would have realized by sale of the goods pledged with it on. claim to the payment of such wages out of the proceeds of the ship obtained by. since the order passed by the commissioner of customs proposed confiscation. commissioner of customs  the benefit of exoneration was given to the crew by. to one another and bestowed the trove on them  alexander  laughing  was asked. we place on record our deep appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered.
[Ratio of the decision] suit and an application for the same is not maintainable and since the vessel. has violated the sovereignty of the indian territorial waters and the. provisions of the  customs. act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ca1962124    the vessel is. liable to be confiscated and there is no question of making any first charge. agencies to consider the legal dues payable to the crew men who are already. suffering and they should not be made to suffer again by denying their. legitimate wages  the court has further observed that since the custom. authorities have already sold the cargo for a price of rs 16 crores and the. money is available with them  it is the paramount duty of the government. agencies to meet the lawful claim of the crew men belonging to a different. country. 1962  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ca1962124. before the division bench  the respondents contended the following    a  the. merchant shipping act. 1958  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act msa1958185   is not. applicable to the foreign sea men. b  the crew members had to file an independent suit and an application in the. pending matter is not maintainable. c  since the government has confiscated the ship the crew men have no lien on. the ship. d  the petitioner herein who has been served with a copy of the order of. confiscation has not challenged the same and it cannot be set aside in the. follows    para 22  we hold that the chief of the ship and crew can invoke the. provisions of the  merchant shipping. act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act msa1958185   as they are. the sea men in a ship under the act  or in other words  the words  under this. act  would refer and qualify the words  the ship  and not  employed or engaged. as a member of the crew    .    we are in entire agreement with the ld  single judge that the provisions. of the act enables a sea man to resort to such a process and such process need. not necessarily be an independent civil suit or any other independent or. separate proceeding and in appropriate cases  it could be a step in aid in. proceedings already pending at the instance of another party  referring to a. judgment in the bold buccleugh  1852  7 mod pc 267 cited in maritime law by. christopher hill  the high court held that as per the legal position in. england it appears that maritime lien can be defeated where the res is. transferred to a foreign government who can plead sovereign immunity. the high court further held that there is no transfer by the owner of the ship. to a foreign government  it held that since it is a case where the owner of a. ship is deprived of the ship completely by way of penalty and the ship has. vested by virtue of confiscation order  the state has become the absolute. owner  the high court compared this with the category where a government. claims sovereign immunity and held that the maritime lien for wages on the. ship extinguishes on the ship being confiscated by the government. the high court  however  made it clear that notwithstanding the decision  the. chief of the ship and the crew can question the validity of the order of. confiscation separately  since it has only considered the effect of the order. as to whether the vesting is subject to the crew s maritime lien for their. wages. above two appeals. continues even if the ship is taken legally from an owner by requisition. c  that the crew are not responsible for confiscation. d  that in a recent decision of the queens  bench in the admiralty. jurisdiction in the lloyds reports in the matter of  ruta   it has been held. that the wage claims have no alternative forms of redressal  but for claiming. it from the proceeds of the ship and that it takes priority even to claims for. salvage. e  that even though the 1926 convention of maritime liens and mortgages has. not yet been ratified by india the principles are very well adopted in. merchant shipping act. 1958  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act msa1958185    under the. merchant shipping. act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act msa1958185    the wages of. the crew cannot be attached under any law. is a priority claim which will have precedence over all matters and that this. principle has been well recognized in indian and foreign courts widely. goes to the crew of the ship. j  that the entire nature of voyage of the ship is shrouded in mystery and. therefore  the claim of just wages is to be viewed in the context of the. illegal activities carried out by the ship over the period of years. k  that the right of the crew for wages will exist on an merchant vessel which. is due to its independent presence in international waters  when the freedom. of the vessel has been deprived by means of confiscation as penalty the vessel. becomes sovereign property of the confiscating government  in such a case  the. claim for wages cannot be considered as the vessel has become the property of. the state in absolute. l  that at no point of time had the crew or any other agency agreed that the. claim for wages can be attached to the ship in case the claim on cargo is. foregone. merits and deserves to be dismissed. property in the ship vests absolutely with the government and that in this. view of the matter  no claim as to wages of the seamen can be entertained by. the government of india. we have carefully perused the entire pleadings  all the annexures and. judgments passed by the learned single judge and of the division bench of the. high court. the view taken by the division bench that consequent upon the confiscation of. the ship  the property in the ship including all interests attached to the. ship gets forfeited does not admit of any exception  in our opinion  is not. that the ship as the matter causing harm  loss or damage to others or to their. property. the  merchant shipping act. scheme of statutory rights towards wages which can be enforced by proceedings. under section 145  in terms of the provisions of section 144  the right of the. seamen to wages is unfettered and no limitations on the entitlement to and. exercise of such entitlement have been enacted in the act  it  therefore. follows that such a right conferred by the statute cannot be infringed. affected or neglected except by express provisions to the contrary  the. provisions of section 115 of the  customs act. 1962  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ca1962124   cannot be. treated as such provisions to the contrary  the right to wages of seamen as. wages of any employee is an integral part of the right to livelihood and is. entitled to the protection under article 21 of the constitution of india  the. right to dignity  which is recognised as guaranteed by article 21 insofar as. it is infringed by withholding of the means of livelihood by any means or. process whatsoever would attract article 21  the provisions of section 144 of. the msa duly reflect this position. this apart  provisions of sections 115 and 126 of the  customs act. 1962  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ca1962124   cannot be. read to include ex proprietary power in regard to any property and  in. particular  a property which is subject to charges and claims  the power to. destroy and deny such charges and claims which are otherwise legal  valid and. legitimate  in other words  in the context of maritime law the exercise and. power under sections 115 and 126 are subject to the satisfaction of claims and. charges created and recognized by law in all civilized countries. the most unique concept of all in admiralty law is the maritime lien  it is a. concept which is sui genesis  but for practical purposes it may be considered. as a charge upon maritime property  arising by operation of law and binding. the property even in the hands of a bona fide purchaser for value and without. notice  but which can only be enforced by an admiralty claim in rem. a maritime lien  adheres to the ship from the time that the facts happened. which gave the maritime lien  and then continues binding on the ship until it. is discharged  either by being satisfied or from the laches of the owner  or. in any other way which  by law  it may be discharged  it commences and there. it continues binding on the ship until it comes to an end. admiralty jurisdiction all over the world recognize the existence of maritime. liens which have evolved over years of state and judicial practice  the. existence and enforceability of such liens outside statute law is well. established  the statutory law in regard to admiralty or maritime claims is. not exhaustive of the subject  courts recognize and applied such members of. maritime liens as capable of enforcement through admiralty  m v  elisabeth and. others case  supra   the above judgment very elaborately deals with the. admiralty powers of the high courts in india  in para 86  it has been clearly. held that the judicial power of this country  which is an aspect of national. sovereignty  is vested in the people and is articulated in the provisions of. the constitution and the laws and is exercised by courts empowered to exercise. it  it is absurd to confine that power to the provisions of imperial statutes. of a bygone age. access to court which is an important right vested in every citizen implies. the existence of the power of the court to render justice according to law. where statute is silent and judicial intervention is required  courts strive. to redress grievances according to what is perceived to be principles of. justice  equity and good conscience   underlining is ours  in the words of. chief justice marshall   1812  11 us  7 cranch  114  143    1812  ussc. distinct and separate jurisdiction as was once the position in england before. the unification of courts  the 1890 and 1891 acts specifically conferred. admiralty jurisdiction on the indian high courts by reason of their being. courts of unlimited jurisdiction  these acts did not create any separate or. distinct jurisdiction  but merely equated the indian high courts to the. position of the english high court  united and consolidated as that court has. been since 1875  for the exercise of admiralty powers within the jurisdiction. of the former  the contrary view expressed in some of the decisions of the. high courts referred to earlier is clearly wrong. 92   once a foreign ship is arrested in indian waters by an order of the high. its owner  wherever the cause of action may have arisen  and whether or not. the ship is subsequently released by the owner furnishing security. proceedings must continue against the owner as in any other suit  the arrest. of the vessel while in indian waters by an order of the high court concerned. as defined under the  merchant shipping act. 1958  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act msa1958185    section. 3 15   attracts the jurisdiction of the competent court to proceed with the. trial  as in the case of any other suit  as an action against the owner  and. any decree obtained by the plaintiff is executable against any property of the. owner available within jurisdiction  including the security furnished by him. the constitutional and statutory protection of such wages there can be no. the pawnor making a default in the payment of debt   seamen who have a right. to wages  which right is enforceable against the ship can legitimately lay a. its sale  in our view  it is immaterial as to why and by what process brings. up the ship for sale either by way of proceedings in rem or otherwise  what is. material is that the proceeds of the sale of the ship are available for. satisfaction of the maritime liens  the absolute character of vesting. following confiscation can be absolute  only against persons having. proprietary right in the ship or goods and more particularly denoting a. suspension or abeyance of such rights  till the confiscation is lifted in. accordance with law  it would be misconceived to extend the scope of such. vesting to the point of extinction of maritime liens particularly seamen s. wages  it is equally well settled that public undertaking such as the port. dock or a harbour possessing statutory power to detain and sell a ship cannot. sell the res free of the liens which have attached prior to the sale  see. corps   corps vs  queen of south  1968  1 llr 182   the seamen s lien will. follow the ship and its proceed in whatsoever hand they may come by title or. purchase from owner and the lien reattaches to the thing after sale and to. whatever is substituted for it   see james sheppard vs  lemuel taylor 8 led. 269  see also para 1907 vol 43  2  halsbury laws of england 4th edn  re. issue  obtaining jurisdiction to the res in pursuance of statutory powers. should be put on the same footing as acquisition of the title following the. crew the vessel is carrying contraband of war  the crew s right to wages does. not cease with the capture of the ship  see austin friars vs  strack   1905  2. are drastic  being penal in nature  statutes conferring such powers must be. read very strictly. there can be no exercise of power under such statutes by way of extension or. implication  no expansive meaning can be given therefore to section 115 of the. customs act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ca1962124. merely from the dictionary meaning the word absolute as has been done by the. division bench of the high court. not on the ground of detection or seizure of any contraband which is sought to. be brought into the territorial waters but for reasons of non compliance with. section 30 of the  customs act. 1962  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ca1962124    the scope of. section 115 2  cannot be extended and be invoked as if this is a case of. transport of contraband goods. it is evident that because of the cargo which was being carried by the ship. namely steel  was treated as smuggled goods for reasons of non compliance. with section 30 of the  customs. act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ca1962124    the. established by the owner or the person incharge of the conveyance that the. conveyance has been used for the prohibited purpose without their knowledge or. connivance  the conclusion drawn by the commissioner is set out below    when. the master is in command of the vessel  the chief officer or the other members. of the crew have no say in the decisions of the master and as such  i do not. find any justification for imposing penalties either on the chief officer or. on the other members of the crew   having regard to the fact that the maritime. liens and  in particular  seamen s wages  have a hallowed place in the. admiralty law  the benefit of the exception under section 115 2  should  in. our view  be extended to the crew. of the confiscation of the ship  we have already seen the order passed by the. final remedy granted is of the kind which might be conferred by a court of. m v  elizabeth case. notwithstanding the fact that the order of arrest of the ship ceased to be in. force by virtue of the withdrawal of the claims for the arrest of the vessel. and sale of the vessel and notwithstanding that the suit which was originally. suit in rem has now become suit in personam  this court continues to have the. power  authority and jurisdiction to consider the said application on merits. and dispose it of  this was the view taken by this court in the case of. elizabeth    this court in the case of m v al quamar v  tsavliris salvage. that the right of the seaman to wages is unfettered and no limitation on the. entitlement is under the  merchant shipping. act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act msa1958185    therefore. section 115 of the  customs. of the wreck  loss or abandonment of the ship among other reasons. also the provision contemplates a situation where the crew is unaware that the. non compliance with section 115  2  cannot be extended and be invoked as if. freight as well including freight payable by sub charterers  therefore in case. of any deficiency in the proceeds from the sale of the vessel the freight can. be called to the court  d r  thomas   maritime liens   p  181   the ship. consequential  therefore if there is no lien on the vessel there can be no. from service rendered to the ship  thus  it can be said that the order of the. single judge which ordered the payment of wages for the crewmen from the. proceeds from the sale of cargo is wrong  but again the order of the division. bench saying  once the order of confiscation of the vessel is passed the. crewmen cannot exercise any lien on the vessel even to get their wages is also. wrong. there exists a maritime lien on the vessel of its crew as established by. judgments and authorities earlier cited  and also as understood maritime lien. is a concept that evolved through the ages by way of customs prevailing in the. law of the seas  no legislation specifically provides for maritime lien to the. crew on the vessel  and it is very clear in judicial practice that no. statutory rule can ever come in the way of the implementation of any customary. practice which has the force of law  the requirement for any customary. practice to have force of law is its practice for a long time and the absence. of any statutory provision expressly prohibiting the implementation of that. particular custom in force  the customary practice of the exercise maritime. lien by the crew members satisfies both these requirements  thus section 115. of the  customs. act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act ca1962124   which talks. about confiscation will not operate to disentitle the crew of the lien that. they can exercise on the vessel for the recovery of their wages which is an. established practice in the law of the seas. also the reliance placed by the division bench on   1958  insc. 56  http   www liiofindia org in cases cen insc 1958 56 html    1959 scr 821. cgi bin lawcite cit 1959 20scr 20821  and   1974  3 scc 833   cgi. customs proposed confiscation not on the ground of detection or seizure of any. contraband goods which is sought to be brought into the territorial waters but. for reasons of non  compliance with section 115  2  cannot be extended and be. invoked as if this is a case of transport of contraband goods. further  the right to wages of seamen as wages of any employee is integral to. article 21 of the constitution  which talks about the right to life and. states that the right of the seaman to wages is unfettered and no limitation. on the entitlement is under the merchant shipping act  therefore it can be. wages out of proceeds of the ship obtained after sale is available with the. crewmen of the ship if their wages are not paid which is integral to the right. to life and liberty guaranteed as a fundamental right to every individual. under the constitution. judicial review and court craft in environmental adjudications  apart from. open and shut cases in the traditional law of nuisance is basically a practice. of forging fellowship and a mutuality of concern extended to strangers in. nature and in one s own community  there will thus be no excluded categories. their disputes and the king s morality in resolving them is given in the story. of a fanciful meeting between alexander the great  and the legendary king. katzya  ruler of a fabulous land beyond the dark mountain. how he would have ruled on such a case in his own land. i would have executed both of them and confiscated the treasure   so king. katzya set out a meal all of gold  when alexander objected that he did not eat. gold  the king exclaimed  with an imprecation   why then do you love it so. he then asked whether the sun shone and the rain fell in alexander s country. and whether there were livestock there  on hearing that there were  he. exclaimed  again with an imprecation   why then it is only by the desert of. those cattle that you survive. judicial review would therefore have to be the ever sustaining appreciation of. the  desert  of all beings in nature and all orders of nature to the. possibility of human life and the need to avoid at any cost the high. probabilities of not only the extinction of the species but destruction of the. rich and wonderful variety of natures productions  in other words it is more. urgent to see judicial review as one of the most immediate means of generating. concern for life beyond us and orders sustaining us  in the minds of people. wielding economic and social power. conclusion. in our opinion  the appellant and other crew members are entitled to a fair. and just treatment and the confiscation of the ship shall not be treated as a. prized catch of an enemy ship deserving condemnation without exception  the. case on hand does not present features of clear and demonstrated complicity of. the crew  the comity of nations is a reciprocal courtesy which one member of. the family of nations owes to the others  in our opinion  the crew members are. not responsible for the confiscation and sale of the ship and the cargo  it is. settled law that action of the state has to be based on reasonableness and it. cannot deprive the basic human rights afforded under the constitution of india. more so under article 21. in our view  the impugned judgment is contrary to the principles of law laid. down by this court in m v al quamar s and m v  elizabeth s cases  supra   in. these cases  this court has held that maritime lien is a right which continues. even if the ship is taken legally from an owner by requisition  the argument. extinguished by confiscation has no force and is without any merit  the courts. have recognized and upheld the welfare of the citizens and have always. recognized the rights of those who are in the lowest strata of the society. especially when it comes to workers and their wages  the seamen have suffered. a lot without wages from may  1999 till the time they were deported by the. consulate  they have suffered a lot of mental and physical agony in spite of. that they have not been given their wages till date due to a narrow approach. recovery of wages shall not be subject to attachment  section 445 of the act. provides that payment of wages of seamen can be made by sale of ship  in the. companies act  under section 529 a  an overriding effect has been given and it. has been provided that in winding up proceedings the worker s dues have. priority over other claims  the madras high court has failed to appreciate. that india has travelled very far from 1950 and that the courts have given way. to a dynamic constructive approach in the aspect of social justice while. referring to international conventions etc. easier. in the result  the order impugned in these appeals passed by the division.

[Facts] respondent at the rate which was prevalent in the year 1985  it was  however. directed that respondent has to pay interest   12  from 1985 upto the date of. actual payment after adjustment of rs 13 700   which had already been paid as. sale consideration  the order was passed in a writ petition filed by the. respondent seeking a direction to the present appellants to modify the price. indicated in the allotment letter dated 13 7 2001  the rate indicated was. rs 3 200   per square yard. background facts in a nutshell are as follows   the appellants acquired land. belonging to several persons for the purpose of urban development of sas. nagar  mohali  punjab   the award was made on 24 3 1976  the respondent was. claiming to be co sharer to the extent of 1 4th in the land so far as an area. of 66 kanals 9 marlas of land is concerned  the appellants had framed scheme. an application on 6 3 1980 taking the stand that he alone was entitled to the. entitlement of a group of co  sharers a writ petition was filed before the. punjab   haryana high court numbered as writ petition no 4837 1981  the. respondent was petitioner no 6  by order dated 4 5 1982  relief was granted to. the writ petitioners except writ petitioner nos  1  6  7 and 15  as noted. above  the respondent was writ  petitioner no 6  in the said order it was. clear that mr  ajmer singh has not claimed any relief qua petitioners nos  1. 6  7 and 15   the matter was carried before this court in ca no 168 1983  by. order dated 11 9 1997 the appeal filed by the present appellants was. dismissed  here again  the entitlement of respondents in the civil appeal was. decided  but so far as respondent mewa singh is concerned  no discussion was. made in view of the admitted position that his case was not pressed before the. high court  the respondent filed petition before the appellant praying for. allotment  the letter written by the respondent dated 8 9 2000 related to. allotment of plot against the original registration no 9895 in the oustees. category  in the accompanying affidavit it was clearly indicated that he was. agreeable to the prevalent rates of punjab urban planning and development  in. short  puda. accordingly on 13 7 2001 allotment letter was issued  it was clearly mentioned. therein that tentative price of the plot was rs 8 40 000   calculated. rs 3 200   per square yd. questioning the rate fixed  the writ petition was filed and as noted above the. high court granted relief directing the rate prevalent in 1985 was to be. applied. that the high court has erroneously proceeded on the basis as if in the. earlier order passed in the writ petition  relief had been granted to the. respondent  it is to be noted that the awards were dated 24 3 1975  20 2 1996. the respondent himself had agreed to pay was applied. on the other hand  learned counsel for the respondent submitted that there was. confusion about the entitlement for the plot where co sharers were involved. the principles relating to allotment were decided earlier by the decision of.
[Ratio of the decision] known as  scheme of 1974  for allotment of residential plots to the eligible. persons whose land was acquired for the aforesaid purpose  the respondent made. allotment of the residential plot under the scheme  there were certain changes. made in the scheme with which we are not concerned  on the question of. and 14 8 1996  in view of the fresh allotment made the rate prevalent which. justified in directing application of rate of 1985. the judgment of the high court is unsustainable on several counts  the first. fallacy in the high court s judgment is that it proceeded on the assumption. that in the earlier writ petition relief had been granted to the respondent. on the contrary  the portion of the high court s order as quoted above clearly. indicates that no relief was claimed so far as the present respondent is. concerned  therefore  the question of respondent being entitled to relief. given to other writ  petitioners and the respondents in the civil appeal. before this court does not arise. admittedly  the respondent himself in the affidavit accompanying the letter. had clearly indicated that he was agreeable to the prevalent rates of puda. this is clearly stated in the paragraph 6 of the affidavit accompanying. respondent s letter dated 8 9 2000  there is no dispute that at the time. allotment was made by the allotment letter dated 13 7 2001  the rate was. rs 3200   per sq  yd. above being the position  the high court s direction to the appellants to. charge rate prevalent in the year 1985 is clearly unsustainable  learned. the rate indicated in the allotment letter dated 13 7 2001  in case the. respondent deposits the amount payable pursuant to the allotment letter within. three months from today  the appellants shall allot the land and deliver. possession within two weeks from the date of the payment of the amount due. which is to be calculated by the appellants.

[Facts] 1   these appeals have been filed against the final judgment and orders of the. karnataka high court dated 15 2 2001 in w p  nos  11728 755 2000  cw w p  nos. 11701 11727 2000   w p  no  10723 2000. 2   heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record. 3   the appellants before us filed o a  nos  1040 1998  1055 1081 1998 etc. before the central administrative tribunal  bangalore bench seeking a. direction to quash rule 6 4  a  of the defence research   development. organization  technical cadre recruitment rules  1995  hereinafter referred to. as the rules  as being violative of article 14   16 of the constitution  and. for a direction to place the applicants appellants in grade ii of category ii. with effect from 26 8 1995 with all consequential benefits. 4   the applicants  appellants before us  were chargemen grade ii in the. service of the union of india  ministry of defence  the union of india. introduced the aforesaid rule on 26 8 1995  we are  however  only concerned. with rule 6 4  a  which states as under.  4   a   all persons holding the posts of chief glass blower  artist cum. photographer  commercial artist  junior scientific assistant grade i. chargeman grade ii and draughtsman grade ii shall be placed in grade 2 of. category ii provided that they possess the qualifications prescribed for. recruitment to the grade of technical assistant a as laid down in schedule. iii failing which they shall be placed in grade 4 of category i. note  for this purpose  the existing incumbents of the posts of draughtsman. grade ii  possessing a certificate or a diploma in draughtsmanship of a. qualifications. 5   a perusal of rule 6 4  a  shows that those chargemen who possess the. category ii while those who do not possess the same will be placed in grade 4. of category i. 6   admittedly  the applicants petitioners did not possess the qualifications. in schedule iii to the rules and hence they were placed in grade iv of. category i  their grievance is that they have been discriminated against. because before coming into force of the rules in 1995 all chargemen grade ii. were in the same category  while now under rule 6 4  a  the erstwhile. chargemen grade ii have been divided into two categories  namely  those who. possess the qualifications in schedule iii and those who do not. the erstwhile chargemen grade ii who had the qualifications mentioned in. schedule iii have been placed in a higher category while those like the. appellants who do not have the said qualifications have been placed in the. lower category  in our opinion  there is no violation of article 14 on such a. categorization.
[Ratio of the decision] article 14 of the constitution because chances of promotion of the appellants. have been adversely affected. 8   we regret we cannot agree  it is well settled by a series of decisions now. that there can be categorization on the basis of educational qualifications. 9   it is well settled that categorization can be done on the basis of. educational qualifications and there will be no violation of article 14 if. this is done. grade ii have been placed better off by the note to rule 6 4  a  vis   vis the. erstwhile chargemen grade ii who did not have the qualifications in schedule.

[Facts] parganas  south  in the state of west bengal  an ex parte decree was passed. against the appellant herein who was arrayed as defendant no 6 in the suit  in. the plaint  the suit property was described as under. that within the township area 2 09 acres comprising of r s  dag nos 340  341. 342  343 and 344 of mouza tegharia morefully described in the schedule a. hereunder written and hereinafter referred to as the suit property  is. situated . 3   plaintiff claimed title over the suit property on the basis of purchases. made under two registered deeds of conveyances dated 27 1 1968 comprising of. 12 shares of plot no 340  341  342 and 343 of mouza tegharia admeasuring 1 39. acres from defendant no 1 and his three sisters. however  in the schedule of property  described in the schedule to the plaint. it was stated. all that acres of land now developed for housing township appertaining to. rs dag no. 4   a decree was passed wherein again the same schedule of property was. described as the property involved in the suit  it was directed. the plaintiff do get a decree for declaration of title and permanent. defendants are restrained by an order of permanent injunction from disturbing. 5   appellant herein did not file any written statement in the said suit. he  however  examined himself as a witness  he did not prefer any appeal. against the said judgment and decree  the said decree indisputably has been. affirmed upto this court. 6   an application for amendment of the plaint as also of the decree. containing the schedule describing the said property was  however  filed on. 27 6 2000  inter alia  stating. that both parties went on trial and adduced both oral and documentary. 80  310  83 . 8   an objection was filed to the said application for amendment by the. appellant  inter alia  contending. whereas after decree in the suit  plaintiff filed an application under. section 151 of cpc stating that the plaintiff claimed title on the basis of. two deeds of conveyances by purchase from heir of dilbahar molla and malekjan. bibi wife of dolbahar molla with the prayer to add different schedule of. 10   the said objection of the appellant was  however  rejected by the learned. executing court  the said order has been upheld by the high court. who were owners of the property had not been impleaded as parties in the suit. and an ex parte decree was obtained by the respondent against the appellant. herein  an irreparable injury would be caused to him if the application for. seriously prejudiced by reason of the impugned order as he had acquired lawful. overlooking of provisions contained in order 7 rule 3 and order 20 rule 3 of. the cpc is capable of being cured  after all a successful plaintiff should not. satisfaction of decree within the meaning of section 47 cpc  a decree of a.
[Ratio of the decision] property. evidence in respect of the suit property and there was never any dispute as to. that at the time of drafting of the plaint through inadvertence the total area. of the land  r s  plot number and khatian number have not been mentioned in. the schedule of the plaint through inadvertence. that it is an accidental error. that it is a clear case of misdescription of the suit property and no. prejudice will be caused to the defendant if the plaint and the decree are. amended at this stage . 7   on the said averments  the proposal for amendment which was made is as. under. in the schedule of the suit property described in the plaint in the 1st line. in the schedule of the suit property described in the plaint in the 3rd line. property with a new case  which is not permissible in law  as such plaintiffs. application is liable to be dismissed summarily . decree is not only confined to a clerical or arithmetical error but also the. pleadings of the parties  if a mistake had occurred in the pleadings and the.  ka schedule particulars of the property. 1   in the district of 24 pargana is under police station and sub registry. office  sonarpur  pargana  medanmalla at mouza teghari  village  included in. as possession in the suit property and the defendants have failed to prove. their possession and title in the suit property  in view of the documentary. evidence adduced by the plaintiff  the r s r o r  appears to be erroneous and. baseless  the defendants have no right to interfere with the peaceful. possession of the plaintiff over the suit property  to my mind  it is a fit. omission  the principle behind the said provision is actus curiae nemenim. the courts also have duty to see that the records are true and present the. correct state of affair  there cannot  however  be any doubt whatsoever that. the court cannot exercise the said jurisdiction so as to review its judgment. it cannot also exercise its jurisdiction when no mistake or slip occurred in. the decree or order  this provision  in our opinion  should  however  not be. construed in a pedantic manner  a decree may  therefore  be corrected by the. that the court cannot only rectify pleadings and decrees but rectify documents. evidencing the transactions themselves  upon which the suit was founded. omission   where it is clear  that such is the case  then i do not see why the. court cannot set it right  in doing so  what is going to be rectified is  the. judgment decree or order  and it is not at all necessary to rectify either the. pleadings or the deed  in making such corrections  however  the court can only. proceed on the footing that there could be no reasonable doubt as to what it. really intended to say in its judgment decree or order. it cannot go into any disputed questions  if there is a particular description. of a property in a deed  and a suit has been instituted on the strength of. that description  and a decree passed  it is not permissible in proceedings. under section 152 to go into disputed questions as to what property was. intended to be dealt with  by the parties in the deed  i agree with gentle c. j  that such a question can only be dealt with  in appropriate proceedings. happen that the mistake is so palpable that nobody can possibly have any doubt. as to what the parties meant or what the court meant when it passed its. judgment  decree or order  for example  suppose in a conveyance a property is. described as  24 chowringhee road  bhawanipur   it would be clear to everybody. what property was meant  and it cannot be seriously doubted that in abating. that the property was in  bhawanipur   the parties had committed an. accidental slip or omission   in such a case  i would not go to the extent of. holding that the court has no power to correct the judgment  decree or order. which has repeated the. mistake  in doing so  the court need not correct the pleadings or the document. but its own decision  in my opinion  it is not necessary in such a case to. amend the pleadings or to rectify the deed  therefore  no question arises as. to whether the court has power to do so  it is  however  quite clear that such. cases must be of rare occurrence  and the scope thereof is severely limited. the power cannot be extended to the resolving of controvertial points  and a. decision as to what the parties intended or did not intent to do  apart from. this exceptional case  i hold that the court cannot correct errors anterior to. the proceedings before it  for such a purpose  the proper proceeding is by way. of a suit under section 31  specific relief act  to this extent  i agree. respectfully with the view enunciated by gentle c  j  in t  m. applying these principles to the facts of this case  i think that the. rectification asked for is impossible  if there has been a mistake in the. original agreement it is a mistake which is fundamental  and it is impossible. without going into evidence  to decide as to what the parties meant  there are. facts in favour of the contention put forward by either party and i cannot. describe it as an error  if there is at all any error  as can be called  an. accidental slip or omission  as contemplated in section 152  in any event. such slips or omissions cannot be rectified in proceedings under section 152. or even under s  151 of the code  22   we  with respect  agree with the. aforenoticed view. in our opinion  the successful party has no other option but to have recourse. of section 152 of cpc which provides for clerical or arithmetical mistakes in. judgments  decrees or orders or errors arising therein from any accidental. slip or omission being corrected at any time by the court either on its own. when the suit as to immovable property has been decreed and the property is. not definitely identified  the defect in the court record caused by. be deprived of the fruits of decree. resort can be had to section 152 or section 47 of the cpc depending on the. facts and circumstances of each case    which of the two provisions would be. more appropriate  just and convenient to invoke  being an inadvertent error. not affecting the merits of the case  it may be corrected under section 152 of. the cpc by the court which passed the decree by supplying the omission. alternatively  the exact description of decretal property may be ascertained. by the executing court as a question relating to execution  discharge or. competent court should not  as far as practicable  be allowed to be defeated. on account of an accidental slip or omission  in the facts and circumstances. omission sought to be corrected which goes to the merits of the case is beyond. the scope of section 152 as if it is looking into it for the first time  for. which the proper remedy for the aggrieved party if at all is to file appeal or. revision before the higher forum or review application before the very forum. subject to the limitations in respect of such review  it implies that the. section cannot be pressed into service to correct an omission which is. intentional  however erroneous that may be  it has been noticed that the. courts below have been liberally construing and applying the provisions of. being substituted by the other  if the court has the requisite power to make. an amendment of the decree  the same would not mean that it had gone beyond. the decree or passing any decree  the statements contained in the body of the. plaint have sufficiently described the suit lands. only because some blanks in the schedule of the property have been left  the. same  by itself  may not be a ground to deprive the respondents from the fruit. of the decree  if the appellant herein did not file any written statement  he. did so at its own peril  admittedly  he examined himself as a witness in the. case  he  therefore  was aware of the issues raised in the suit  it is stated. that an advocate commissioner has also been appointed  we  therefore  are of. the opinion that only because the jl numbers in the schedule was missing  the. same by itself would not be a ground to interfere with the impugned order. 27   so far as the application for impleadment of the applicants are. concerned  they being not parties to the suit are not bound by the decree.

[Facts] 1   leave granted. 2   this case has a chequered history  appellants herein were appointed as. chargeman grade ii  they were  in terms of the scheme dated 23rd april  1965. required to appear in an examination for appointment to the post of chargeman. grade ii or supervisor grade a initially  they appeared in the said. examination  they were  however  appointed as supervisor grade a on account of. the marginal difference in the marks obtained by them from the others who were. appointed as chargeman grade ii  the director general on or about 4th may. 1967 taking into consideration the marginal difference in the marks obtained. by the appellants decided to give another chance to the appellants to appear. within six months in the next examination so as to enable them to be graded as. chargeman grade ii  in the event  if they qualify therein  it resulted in. issuance of government order dated 4th may  1967 in terms of which the 1965. scheme was amended as under    the supervisory apprentices who secure 5. marks less in the aggregate than prescribed by the central selection board for. gradation as chargeman grade ii in a particular gradation examination will be. chance at the next gradation examination and on the basis of their performance. may be graded by the d g o f  as fit for appointment as chargeman grade ii and. appointed as such with effect from a date after they are so graded in the. subsequent gradation examination. the gradation examination  allegedly  however  the government of india. filed writ petition before the delhi high court  appellant herein filed a. similar writ petition before the calcutta high court which was marked as. cr1671 w 83  on establishment of the central administrative tribunal under the. provisions of the administrative tribunal act  1985 those petitions were. transferred to the central administrative tribunal and were marked as. ta 1069 86  however  with effect from 1st january  1980 the post of supervisor. grade a and the chargeman grade ii were directed to merge  the central. administrative tribunal allowed the said transferred application of the. appellants by an order dated 9th july  1990 directing    on the facts and. direct the respondent authorities to refix the respective notional seniority. of the applicants and fix their pay scale and all benefits attached thereto as. per rule on the basis that all the applicants came out successful in the. selection test for promotion to the post of chargeman grade ii from their. the applicants will be entitled to be paid in accordance with the fixed pay. scale and all these directions must be completed within 90 days from date. as the present application was filed in the representative capacity by. obtaining leave under rule 11 of cpc from the honble high court on 18 3 83. this decision will be binding on all other persons similarly situated and. them to avoid future litigation on the same issue  however  the said. direction was partially modified by this court to which we would advert to a. little later. the said order was challenged before this court  no stay  however  was granted. therein  as the central government was not implementing the said order the. present contempt petition was filed. appellants herein also filed an interlocutory application which was marked as. ia 3 of 1992 for a direction upon the central government not to make any. promotion ignoring the order of the tribunal dated 9th july  1990  this court. by its orders dated 21st september  1992 directed    heard learned counsel. january  1993 . the said order passed in ia no 3 of 1992  however  was modified on an. application filed in that behalf by the union of india. we may place on record that another application was also filed on behalf of. all india association of non gazetted officers for intervention and direction. whereupon by an order dated 13th may  1993 this court directed    union of. india has filed an application for modifying the order dated 21 9 92 stating. that this stay has been causing bottlenecks in the operational system due to. the promotions having been stayed by this court  since the appeal has already. heard  the appeal preferred by the union of india was dismissed by this court. by an order dated 5th august  1993  observing. having heard the learned counsel for the appellant we must confess our. inability to appreciate the attitude of the union of india for approaching. three years  appellants contend that by the said order dismissing the appeal. preferred by the union of india  this court was alive to the fact that the. appellants petitioners but also affected their seniority and promotion. needless to say that despite appointment of every supervisor grade a. chargeman grade ii the discrimination which occurred due to enforcement of the. modified scheme since 1965 permitted only few supervisors grade a to appear in. the next examination persisted so far those supervisor grade a were. concerned who were appointed prior to coming into force of this scheme and. were denied similar opportunity even though they came in field of eligibility. the injustice arose as  if the policy of permitted supervisors grade a to. the supervisors would have remained the same and those appointed in one year. it is not the appointment of petitioners of chargeman grade ii from 1980 but. also the determination of their seniority which was material as it is admitted. that the higher posts are available for promotion on the basis of seniority. appellant should have taken care to see that the order of the high court was. complied  the honble court further observed   in any case the tribunal in. directing the respondents to be granted notional appointment as charegeman. who came in the field of eligibility namely of securing less than 5  marks in. aggregate fixed for selection as chargeman grade ii  should be fixed by. directing that they were selected for that post six months from the date of. their gradation examination  we may also notice here that the appellants were. not to be granted any back wages in terms of the order of the tribunal dated. 9th july  1990  they  however  claimed to be entitled to all the benefits. the said order  according to them  was partially implemented wherefor two. letters one being dated 4th november  1993 and another being dated 10th. november  1993 were issued stating    on the basis that all the applicants. came out successful in the selection test for promotion to the post of. chargeman gr  ii from their respective dates of examination  but they will not. be entitled to any back wages or any other financial benefits save and except. the notional seniority  it was necessary to firm up the seniority position. of the individuals in the grades of chargeman gr  i assistant foreman and. foreman as required by holding review dpcs on the basis of the amended. seniority list in the grade of chargeman gr ii as on 1 1 77 the said orders. were  however  withdrawn purported to be on the basis of a full bench judgment. of the central administrative tribunal which was rendered in the meanwhile  it. was stated. in view of the above  the beneficiaries in the case of purnendu mukhopadhyay. ors  can be allowed notional seniority in the grade of chargeman gr  ii. tech  only  for determining revised date from which presumptive pay should be. fixed  the persons who are granted notional seniority can be superceded by. persons regularly promoted  later on the said order dated 4th november  1983. was also withdrawn directing    12  thus the seniority of purnendu. mukhopadhyay and ors  in the revised seniority list of chargeman gr  ii  tech. will count from the dates when they were regularly promoted or appointed as. chargeman gr  ii  tech  according to recruitment rules  it is not in dispute. that one s k  ganguly and others relying on the judgment and order of the. central administrative tribunal filed an original application before it  the. said o a was allowed  the order of the tribunal in the case of ganguly was. implemented  the tribunal by reason of the impugned judgment  however  inter. alia placing reliance upon a decision of this court in j s  parihar v  ganpat. duggar and others   1996  6 scc 291  and vijay singh  secretary home and. another v  mittanlal hindoliya   1997  1 scc 258  accepted the said plea of. union of india and inter alia directed    while finalizing such revised. seniority  for deciding inter se seniority vis a viz the 26 petitioners of oa. 789 96  who have been indentified by the official respondents as similarly. circumstance with the successful applicants of ta  1069 of 1986  purnendu and. have accordingly been notified as such by the official respondents through. their notifications dated 14 8 85 and 14 11 95 vide anenxures e and f. respectively to oa 789 96  read with d g o f  notification dated 23 2  96. annexure g in ma 222 1995 it will be necessary that they are treated as. belonging to the group described at para 80 i  of the full bench  pb  judgment. dated 22 12 1995  reproduced at para 51 1  above  in the instant judgment  in. other words  they would be in the first category of employees who were. appointed as chargeman gr ii prior to 1 1 73  this court by an order dated. 1st march  2007 with a view to ascertain the correct position in regard to the. implementation of the earlier orders  directed the respondents to file a. status report  pursuant to the said direction a status report has been filed. in the said status report it has been accepted that the benefits given to s k. ganguly and others have not been given to the appellants inter alia in view of. the pendency of the present special leave petition as also interpretation on. the concept of notional seniority by the full bench of the central. administrative tribunal dated 22nd december  1995. the bone of contention of the respondents  therefore  is the judgment of the. full bench of the central administrative tribunal dated 22nd december  1995 as. appearing in their affidavit  which is as under.  i  the judgment decided the principles of seniority of the various. categories of chargeman grade ii t   all the candidates in the present slp got. their notional seniority prior to 01 01 73 in pursuance of the judgment of the. honble supreme court of india dt  05 08 1993  hence they are the first lot of. persons for the purpose of seniority in the psot of chargeman grade ii t  as. per the judgment of the full bench of the honble tribunal and have been given. the seniority in the grade as per sub para  i  and para 80 of the full bench. judgment. ii  the judgment of full bench had also interpreted the concept of notional. seniority and its consequential benefits in para 76  77   78 of the judgment. of the full bench of the honble tribunal  as per the interpretation the. notional seniority is used only for determining the date with effect from. central administrative tribunal as confirmed by this court with modification. the appellants were not only entitled to be appointed as chargeman grade ii. but also were entitled to promotion to higher grades and respective notional. seniority at each level. ii  determination of seniority at each grade therefore was material. iii  although an order of stay was passed by the central administrative. tribunal in oa no  521 of 1988 but the same related to only paragraph 13 of. the judgment of the tribunal and not paragraphs 11 and 12 thereof. iv  the appellants were entitled to promotion having regard to the facts that. those who were juniors to them have been promoted in terms of rule 18 4 3.
[Ratio of the decision] graded as supervisor grade a or equivalent but will be allowed to take another. this will have retrospective effect to cover the past cases in which the dgof. has already allowed the supervisory apprentices another chance to appear in. adopted a policy of pick and choose and did not grant the benefit of the said. scheme to which they were otherwise entitled thereto  a k  saxena and others. circumstances of this case  we with respect  agree with the observations of. the supreme court set out above  we are also of the view that the respondent. authorities  in not calling the applicants to sit in the examinations held. earlier had acted discriminately. as the course for the official respondents has admitted that holding of. intended examination is not necessary. we direct the respondent authorities not to hold the examination  we also. respective dates of examination  but they will not be entitled to any back. similarly affected  the respondents are directive to give the same benefits to. for both the parties on ia 3. taking in view  the entire facts and circumstances of this case  we direct. union of india not to make promotions on the posts of foreman  assistant works. manager and further higher posts ignoring the judgment of the central. administrative tribunal  calcutta dated 9th july  1990 till the final disposal. of the present appeal  the appeal may be listed for disposal in the month of. been directed to be posted for final disposal  the stay creates difficulty for. the administration to function  we permit the union of india to make. promotions in respect of the posts above the post of foreman on according to. the rules but any promotion made will be further reviewed and be subject to. this court by way of special leave petition and delay the matters b y another. dispute between the parties not only related to original. occurring during the pendency thereof  while considering the question of. removal of discrimination allegedly meted out to the appellants and. determination of their seniority which was material for their promotion to. improve their grade would not have been introduced then the seniority amongst. grade ii from the date of their first examination  in the peculiar. circumstances of the case  does not appear to have committed any error of law. in our opinion  this was the only possible manner in which the injustice could. have been remedied  the court  however  modified the said order to the. it is however  clarified that the placement of all those supervisor grade a. attached thereto including seniority and promotion to the higher posts. which the presumptive pay should be fixed  it does not give the benefit of. seniority  higher notional seniority cannot be given to the detriment of. others who have been actually promoted earlier  it is not always necessary. that retrospective promotion should also be accompanied by retrospective. concerned have been promoted  he should be promoted immediately and if there. is no vacancy the junior most person officiating in the higher grade should be. reverted to accommodate him  on promotion  his pay should be fixed under f r. 27 as the stage it would have reached  had he been promoted from the date the. officer immediately below him was promoted but no arrears would be admissible. the seniority of the officer would be determined in the order in which his. name  on review  has been placed in the select list by d p c  if in any such. case a minimum period of qualifying service is prescribed for promotion to. higher grade  the period from which an officer placed below the officer. concerned in the select list was promoted to the higher grade  should be. reckoned towards the qualifying period of service for the purpose determining. his eligibility for promotion to the next higher grade   v  the contention of. the respondents that the employees who had been accorded notional seniority. cannot be equated with those who had been regularly appointed is unsustainable. as the object and purport of the order of the tribunal as also of this court. were to remove discrimination meted out to the appellants by promoting their. juniors. vi  the order of the full bench dated 22nd december  1995 is not applicable. according to the appellants  their case falls under category i of the full. bench judgment  this fact has also been accepted by the respondents in their. status report  thus if the appellants were to be appointed and or promoted as. chargeman grade ii before 1st january  1973 they became seniors to the other. employees  as we have noticed hereinbefore that s k  ganguli and others had. been given the benefit of the order passed by the tribunal  we do not. appreciate the stand of the respondents in this behalf inasmuch as whereas one. set of order involving employees who were similarly situated to those of the. appellants  benefits have been given but the same are being denied to them. such an action on the part of the respondents in our opinion is wholly. unjustifiable  the judgment of a court  as is well known  should not be read. as a statute  it has to be read in its entirety  so read  the appellants had. become entitled to the grant of benefits contemplated thereby  there is no. reason why the same shall be denied to them. supra  could be applicable  the state cannot treat employees similarly. situated differently  it cannot implement the orders in relation to one and.

[Facts] 95 of the said act  the second category of cases arise out of the  motor. vehciles act. 1988  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act mva1988172    hereinafter. referred to as the new act  prior to its amendment in 1994. in this category also a similar question is raised. or his authorized representative. 9   correctness of the decision in satpal singh  supra  came up for. the date of accident being 16 12 1993  the amendment carried out in the year. 13   the motor accident claims tribunal  nalgonda  by a judgment and award. dated 13 11 1997 awarded various sums overruling the defence of the appellant. herein that they were unauthorized passengers  the high court  however  by. reason of the impugned judgment  relying on or on the basis of a decision of. this court in satpal singh  supra  directed as under. ca   slp  c  no 7241 7243 03 15   in the aforementioned case  accident took. place on 24 12 1993. respondents herein filed a claim petition claiming compensation for the death. of one kota venkatarao who had allegedly paid a sum of rs 20   for travelling. in the lorry  the tribunal held. in the absence of rebuttal evidence from the deceased and some others. travelled in the said vehicle in the capacity of owner of the luggage which. was carried by them at the time of accident. gratuitous passengers  the admitted plea of the respondents themselves was. that the deceased had boarded the lorry and paid an amount of rs 20   as. ca   slp  c  no 7248 03. 20   the accident in this case took place on 3 1 1991  twenty persons were. travelling in the truck  the policy covered the risk only of the owner of the. owners of the goods is covered by the policy  it was held. on a careful consideration of the various authorities cited by the learned. framed under m v  act i have no hesitation to conclude that the risk of the. owner of the goods is also covered by the policy issued by the insurance. 21   the learned tribunal  however  noticed. 22   upon considering the evidences on record  it was held. as the permitted seating capacity of the lorry is only 3 including the. driver and cleaner and as only one non fare paying passenger as owner of goods. 23   the high court  however  dismissed the appeals preferred by the. respondents relying upon satpal singh  supra   submission of the learned. the learned tribunal discussed the matter in great details  it is not in. dismissed. ca   slp  c  nos 7288 7290 03. 25   in this case  the accident took place on 1 5 1997  indisputably  the. respondent was travelling as a passenger  the tribunal  while determining the. issue as to whether the accident took place due to rash and negligent driving. of the first respondent  driver of lorry aew 5199  held. the lorry was overturned and caused the instantaneous death of four. passengers  he received small injuries  he also deposed that the accident took. place due to the negligence of the driver of the said lorry  on perusing his. evidence i am satisfied that he is a truthful witness  he was travelling in. the crime vehicle along with deceased along with his goods as per his. evidence   . i am doing tamarind business  i witnessed the accident which took place about. 3 years back at about 6 a m  at borrampalem junction beyond talluru  at the. time of the accident i was in the crime lorry by the side of the driver. myself and 6 others were carrying tamarind in that lorry belonging to us  we. boarded the lorry along with our load of tamarind at dharamavaram to go to. rajanagaram  we were selling the tamarind at rajanagaram in retail by taking. the tamarind there in our lorry from our village of dharmavaram . 27   the tribunal  therefore  correctly recorded that according to pw 2  he. was travelling with his goods as owner thereof and not the deceased. 28   shaik shabbeer pasha and shaik nazeer pasha are the driver andowner. respectively of the lorry which was travelling to rajahmundry from. visakhapatnam  at borrampalem  while trying to overtake another speeding. lorry  the same turned turtle  three persons who were travelling in the. vehicle had been killed  claim for compensation were filed before the motor. accidents claim tribunal  the appellants therein opposed the claim. tribunal awarded compensation to the legal heirs of the deceased.
[Ratio of the decision] different  different provisions would apply  we would notice the law operating. in the field at the outset and apply the same in each case separately. 3   the relevant portion of section 147 of the motor vehicles act  for short. employment other than a liability arising under the  workmen s compensation. act  1923  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act wca1923263    in. c  if it is a goods vehicle  being carried in the vehicle  or  ii  except. where the vehicle is a vehicle in which passengers are carried for hire or. reward or by reason of or in pursuance of contract of employment  to cover. liability in respect of the death of or bodily injury to persons being carried. in or upon or entering or mounting or alighting from the vehicle at the time. of the occurrence of the event out of which a claim arises. 4   the said provision underwent an amendment in the year 1994 by motor. any person  including owner of the goods or his authorised representative. carried in the vehicle  or damage to any property of a third party caused by. or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place. ii. contained in the old act has been removed and the policy should insure the. liability incurred and cover injury to any person including owner of the goods. or his authorised representative carried in the vehicle. the legislature has also taken care of even the policies which were in force. on the date of commencement of the act by specifically providing that any. policy of insurance containing any limit regarding the insurers liability. the first category of cases arise out of the  motor vehicles act. 1939  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act mva1939172    hereinafter. referred to as the old act   the question raised for this category is. whether the insurance company is liable to pay the compensation on account of. the death or bodily injury of the gratuitous passengers including the owner of. raised . 8   the act does not contemplate that a goods carriage shall carry a large. number of passengers with small percentage of goods as considerably the. insurance policy covers the death or injuries either of the owner of the goods. vehicle could not carry any passenger  as the words in addition to. passengers occurring in the definition of goods vehicle in the 1939 act were. omitted. furthermore  it categorically states that goods carriage would mean a motor. vehicle constructed or adapted for use  solely for the carriage of goods. carrying of passengers in a goods carriage  thus  is not contemplated under. the 1988 act. 24   we have further noticed that section 147 of the 1988 act prescribing the. requirements of an insurance policy does not contain a provision similar to. decision of this court in mallawwa case must be held to have been rendered. having regard to the aforementioned provisions. 25   section 147 of the 1988 act  inter alia  prescribes compulsory coverage. against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of public service. vehicle  proviso appended thereto categorically states that compulsory. coverage in respect of drivers and conductors of public service vehicle and. employees carried in a goods vehicle would be limited to the liability under. the workmens compensation act  it does not speak of any passenger in a goods. carriage. 26   in view of the changes in the relevant provisions in the 1988 act. vis a vis the 1939 act  we are of the opinion that the meaning of the words. any person must also be attributed having regard to the context in which. they have been used i e  a third party  keeping in view the provisions of. the 1988 act  we are of the opinion that as the provisions thereof do not. enjoin any statutory liability on the owner of a vehicle to get his vehicle. insured for any passenger travelling in a goods vehicle  the insurers would. not be liable therefor. any passenger of a public service vehicle caused by or arising out of the use. of the vehicle in a public place. 28   an owner of a passenger carrying vehicle must pay premium for covering. the risks of the passengers  if a liability other than the limited liability. passengers  the owner of a goods carriage need not take out an insurance. vehicle from carrying any passenger  this is clear from the expression  in. addition to passengers  as contained in definition of  good vehicle  in the. old act  the position becomes further clear because the expression used is. good carriage  is solely for the carriage of goods  carrying of passengers in. a goods carriage is not contemplated in the act. there is no provision similar to clause  ii  of the proviso appended to. section 95 of the old act prescribing requirement of insurance policy  even. section 147 of the act mandates compulsory coverage against death of or bodily. injury to any passenger of  public service vehicle   the proviso makes it. further clear that compulsory coverage in respect of drivers and conductors of. public service vehicle and employees carried in goods vehicle would be limited. to liability under the  workmen s compensation act. 1923  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act wca1923263    in short. wc act. there is no reference to any passenger in  goods carriage. 14   the inevitable conclusion  therefore  is that provisions of the act do. not enjoin any statutory liability on the owner of a vehicle to get his. vehicle insured for any passenger travelling in a goods carriage and the. insurer would have no liability therefor   see also oriental insurance co. 1994 in section 147 of the  motor vehicles. act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act mva1939172   would not be. applicable. gratuitous passengers in the vehicle though vehicle is of any type or class. 14   following the aforementioned principles  the impugned judgment cannot be. it cannot be said that it is a violation of the policy  since it is not. fundamental breach so as to afford to the insurer to eschew the liability. altogether as per the decision reported in air 1996 supreme court 2054  16. thus  the claim form corroborate the testimony of the petitioners that. deceased or the injured as the case may be travelled in the vehicle as owner. compensation . aforementioned twenty persons  it is the respondents having preferred an. appeal  this court should hold that at least the claimants respondents are. entitled to compensation as the deceased was travelling as owner of the goods. aforementioned finding  it is evident that the respondent was travelling as. the owner of the goods  we do not think that the said submission is correct. company could not be sustained  the high court dismissed the appeal of the. insurance company following satpal singh  supra.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. home        databases   databases html     worldlii  http   www worldlii org. slp  crl   no 82 of 2002  hari prasad chhapolia    appellant versus union of. india    respondent. dr  arijit pasayat  j. 1   this appeal was filed challenging the correctness of the judgment of a. learned single judge of the orissa high court. the appellant hari prasad chhopolia was convicted for offences punishable. under sections 135 b  1  of the customs act  1962  in short the  customs act. and section 85  ii    iii    viii  and  ix  of the gold  control  act  1968. in short the  gold act   by the trial court  the high court by the impugned. offence punishable under section 85 of the gold act  leave was granted by this. court by order dated 17 1 2002  the matter was listed for hearing on 7 6 2007. when none appeared for the appellant  the matter was adjourned to 12 6 2007. when it was mentioned that the appellant hari prasad chhapolia has died. the matter was directed to be listed after three weeks  the matter was listed. on 17 7 2007 when on the prayer made by the learned counsel for the appellant. the matter was adjourned by four weeks  on 29 8 2007 the following order was. passed. learned counsel for the appellant prays for time  from the order sheet  it is. clear that on june 12  2007 the matter was called for final hearing before the. vacation bench  at that time  it was stated that the appellant has expired. the learned counsel for the appellant sought time to get instructions. 2007 and on that day 2 also order was passed to list the matter after four. weeks. even today  learned counsel for the appellant prays for time  as a last. 2   on 25 10 2007 six weeks  time was granted to the counsel to file. vakalatnama and memo of appearance on behalf of legal heirs of the deceased. appellant  it is to be noted that by that time no application for bringing on. record the legal heirs of the deceased appellant had been filed  again on. 11 12 2007  at the request of learned counsel who appeared for the deceased. appellant  the matter was directed to be listed after one week  on 11 6 2008. on request the matter was directed to be listed today  it appears that an. application has been filed on 4 1 2008 for substitution for bringing legal. representatives of the appellant on record along with the application for. condonation of delay  the only ground indicated in the application seeking. condonation was that the legal heirs of the appellant were not aware that the. death of their father has to be intimated to the counsel at delhi for 3. preparing and filing the application for substitution  the moment they knew. about this requirement they contacted their counsel and application has been. filed on 4 1 2008. the code of criminal procedure  1973  in short the  code   has no application. to an appeal before the supreme court  in any event  time statutorily. prescribed is 30 days  in the instant case  application has been filed nearly. after one year of the death of the appellant  hari prasad chhapolia  therein. also no explanation has been offered as to why the application was filed after. 1645    cgi bin lawcite cit air 201964 20sc 201645  three judge bench of this. court was dealing with the situation as to whether appeal by special leave. against sentence of imprisonment abates on the death of the accused appellant. three separate judgments were rendered by the hon ble judges  the principles. as can be culled out from the said decision are as follows   though rendered. in the context of the old code are equally applicable under the cr p c. 1  section 431 of the old code does not apply proprio vigore to a case of. appeal filed with the special leave of the supreme court granted under article. 136 of the constitution of india  1950  in short the  constitution   when the. appellant accused dies pending the appeal. permitted to be continued by the legal representatives of the deceased. appellant accused  there is no provision making such appeals abate  if they. should appeals  for between them no distinction in principle is possible for. the purpose of continuance. devolve on her on the death of her husband. 15   in bondada gajapathy rao v  state of a p  the appellant was convicted by. imprisonment for life  he filed an appeal in this court by special leave but. died during the pendency 8 of the appeal  his sons and daughter applied for. substitution as his legal representatives contending that the conviction of. their father had resulted in his removal from government service and if the. conviction were set aside the estate will be able to claim the arrears of. salary from the date of conviction till the date of his death  this court. declined to permit the legal representatives to continue the appeal on the. ground that the claim on the strength of which they sought permission to. continue the appeal was too remote  this decision is distinguishable as the. appeal was not from a sentence of fine and as the interest of the legal. representatives was held to be contingent and not direct  even if the.
[Ratio of the decision] criminal appellate jurisdiction criminal appeal no  of 2008  arising out of. order set aside the conviction and sentence for the offence punishable under. section 135 b  1  of the customs act while upholding the conviction for the. chance  list the matter after two weeks. 2  but where the appeal is against sentence of fine  the appeal may be. can be continued when arising under the old code  there is no reason why they. should not be continued when arising under the constitution  if revision. 4  but where the sentence is not one of fine but of imprisonment  which on. the death of the accused becomes infructuous  the sentence does not affect the. property of the deceased accused in the hands of his legal representatives. and therefore  the appeal  in such a case  would abate  upon the death of the. accused. 5  in fact that the accused was a government servant and was under suspension. during the trial and the fact that if the conviction and sentence were set. aside  his estate would be entitled to receive full pay for the period of. suspension  cannot be said to affect his estate  because  the setting aside of. the sentence would not automatically entitle the legal representatives to the. salary  it would be extending the principle applied to the case of a sentence. of fine  if on the basis of it appeal against imprisonment is allowed to be. continued by the legal representatives after the death of the appellant and. for such an extension there is no warrant  reference was made to pranab kumar. mitra vs  state of west bengal and anr   air  1959 sc 144     cgi. bin lawcite cit 1959 20sc 20144. 6. no explanation is given in this application for not approaching the court. within that prescribed period and no sufficient cause is shown for condonation. of such undue and inordinate delay of 10 years  a decision of this court in. p s r  sadhanantham v. therefore  section 431 has no application and the question whether the appeal. abated on the death of the appellant is not governed strictly by the terms of. that section  but  in the interests of uniformity  there is no valid reason. for applying to appeals under article 136 a set of rules different from those. therefore necessary to find the true meaning and scope of the provision. xx xx. 14   if this be the true interpretation of section 431  there is no reason why. the same principle ought not to be extended to criminal appeals filed in this. court under article 136 of the constitution. accordingly the widow of the deceased appellant who has been brought on the. record of the appeal as his legal representative is entitled to continue the. appeal as the sentence of fine directly affects the property which would. conviction were set aside  the legal representatives would not have. automatically got the arrears of salary due to their father. 7   in view of what has been stated by this court in the afore noted cases the. principles embodied in section 394 of the code can be pressed into service in. appeals before this court  it is true that the period of 30 days has been. statutorily fixed for making an application by the legal heirs. in the instant case  the application was filed nearly after one year  we need. not go into the question as to whether there is scope for condonation of delay. as no acceptable explanation has been offered for the delayed presentation. know the requirement is clearly without any substance  the appeal has abated.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. home        databases   databases html     worldlii  http   www worldlii org. search   forms search1 html     feedback   liiofindia feedback html. supreme court of india. you are here      liiofindia         databases   databases html      supreme court of india           2008            2008  insc 1027. database search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc     name. search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc title 1     recent. madhya pradesh     appellant kalyan singh     respondent order this is a state. appeal by special leave against the judgment dated 20 3 2001 of madhya pradesh. high court in criminal appeal no 447 of 1988 acquitting the respondent kalyan. singh  accused no 1  by giving him the benefit of doubt. 2   the prosecution case in brief is that there was enmity between balbir. singh  father of respondent and jagdish  pw12  on account of jagdish defeating. balbir singh in the sarpanch elections  on 18 3 1984  a day after the holi. festival  jagdish as sarpanch  invited the villagers for playing faag at. panchayat bhawan  one barar  a member of jagdish s group  was playing 2. dholak  balbir singh came there and tried to snatch the dholak from barar. jagdish objected to balbir trying to play dholak at faag function organized by. him and tried to pull the dholak  in the meanwhile  kalyan singh  son of. balbir came there armed with a gun  balbir exhorted him to kill jagdish. kalyan singh fired at jagdish causing injury on the hip of jagdish  jagdish. fired back with his pistol and balbir collapsed and died  thereafter  kalyan. singh took another shot at jagdish  the shot hit bhajju who fell down and. died  gajraj  pw8   who was standing nearby  also received pellet injuries. when kalyan singh again tried to shoot  banmali  pw1  snatched the gun and. ran  sovran  a2  and ghanshyam  a4  beat banmali  banmali fell down  gajraj. took the gun from banmali and kept it in the shop of jagdish. 3   on receipt of the information  police visited the place of incident and on. the dehati nalshi of given by pw7 sita ram   ex p7   fir was registered. jagdish  pw12   gajraj  pw8  and banmali  pw1  who sustained injuries in the. incident were medically examined  after investigation police submitted a. charge sheet against the respondent kalyan singh  a1  for the offence under. 307 ipc for attempting to murder jagdish and for offences under sections 25. and 27 of arms act  for using 3 the gun without a licence  the charge sheet. was also filed against accused nos 2 to 6 for offences under section 201 ipc. alleging that they had filed a false report with the police with the purpose. of concealing the murder of bhajju. 4   the defence was that jagdish  pw12  and his party came to the house of. balbir singh and called him  when balbir came out  jagdish  pw12  shot him and. balbir died  then  bhajju nephew of balbir singh came running to the place of. incident  one hari gupta belonging to the group of jagdish shot him and bhajju. died  the accused relied on the reports ex d4 and ex d9 and the evidence of. dw1 to dw4 who narrated the defence version  it is stated that dw4 was the. father and dw3 was the brother of deceased bhajju. 5   the police however on investigation was of the view that hari gupta did. not shoot bhajju and they accepted the version of jagdish and his party. the trial court by its judgment dated 12 4 1988 acquitted accused 2 to 6 as. prosecution was not able to prove the offence under section 201 ipc against. them  in so far as kalyan singh  a1  was concerned  the trial court held that. prosecution had proved the offences under sections 302 and 307 ipc 4 and. sections 25 and 27 of arms act  it sentenced the first respondent to undergo. ri for life  three years  one year and three years respectively for the. offences under sections 302 ipc  307 ipc  sections 25 and 27 of arms act. 6   feeling aggrieved  kalyan singh filed an appeal  the madhya pradesh high. court by its judgment dated 20 3 2001 allowed the appeal and set aside the. conviction and sentence against kalyan singh  it gave him the benefit of doubt. for the following four reasons. i  though the occurrence took place on 18 3 1984  the statements of three. eye witnesses  namely  banmali  pw1   dhani ram  pw3  and michhua  pw4  were. recorded only on 6 4 1984 and the evidence of two other eye witnesses   pholua. pw5  and sita ram  pw7  were recorded on 7 4 1984 and there was no. explanation for the delay of three weeks in recording their statements. ii  sita ram  pw7  categorically stated that he had lodged the report at. police station  but the prosecution case was that dehati nalsi  ex p7  was. recorded at the spot. iii  there was non compliance with the provision of section 157 cr pc as the. report was not sent to the nearest magistrate. 5  iv  according to the evidences of dhani ram  pw3  and michhua  pw4   kalyan. singh fired from a distance but the doctor found blackening on the body of the. deceased bhajju and that did not fit in with the case of the prosecution. the high court accepted the contention of the defence that the prosecution. exhorted his son kalyan singh to kill him  jagdish  and kalyan singh. accordingly fired two shots   one of which hit jagdish on his hip and the. second missed jagdish but hit bhajju and killed him  it is also the case of. the prosecution that after kalyan singh shot jagdish  jagdish retaliated by. firing at balbir and consequently balbir singh died  but the evidence of pws. 1  3 and 5 is significant  they stated that jagdish did not fire back after. being hit  their version is that on being hit by the bullet fired by kalyan. singh  jagdish fell down and his gun was accidentally triggered and. consequently balbir singh was hit  but this was different from the case of the. prosecution that when kalyan singh fired at jagdish  jagdish fired back. hitting balbir singh  we are referring to this aspect to show that pws 1  3. and 5 are clearly jagdish s men trying to exonerate jagdish and implicate. kalyan singh and their belated statements are apparently an attempt to create. a story favouring jagdish and implicating kalyan singh  if pws 1  3  4  5 and. and balbir  the two persons who died belonged to the group of accused  namely. balbir  father of the accused no 1 and bhajju  cousin of accused no 1  but. kalyan singh is implicated for the murder of bhajju by these alleged eye. witnesses by belatedly coming forward and countering the defence version that.
[Ratio of the decision] criminal appellate jurisdiction criminal appeal no 1062 of 2003 state of. creating a doubt about the prosecution case. 7   the said acquittal is challenged by the state in this appeal by special. mentioned by the high court were not material  nor sufficient to dislodge the. effect of the clear evidence of the injured witnesses pws 1  8 and 12 and the. other eye witnesses pws 3  4  5  and 7  the question that therefore falls for. our consideration is whether the circumstances referred to by the high court. are so insignificant and irrelevant  so as to require interference with the. judgment of the high court. 8   the fact that the incident occurred on 18 3 1984 and the statements of. pws 1  3 and 4 were recorded only on 6 4 1984 and the statements of pws. 5 and 7 were recorded only on 7 4 1984 nearly three weeks later is not in 6. dispute  when this fact is looked at proper perspective  we find that high. court was justified in accepting this as a relevant circumstance  the. prosecution case is virtually the version put forth by jagdish and his party. according to the prosecution witnesses  jagdish and his group   balbir. 7 were all present at the time of the incident  there is no explanation why. their statements were not recorded for three weeks  one explanation is 7 that. they were not eye witnesses and another is that they did not immediately come. forward to tell the truth but came forward belatedly with a fabricated. hari gupta of jagdish s group shot bhajju  therefore the delay in recording. the statements of pws 1  3  4  5 and 7 had a material bearing on the case. 9   similarly  the question whether dehati nalsi was recorded at site or not. also assumes relevance  dehati nalshi is based on sita ram s statement which. in fact is the prosecution case  this is completely at variance from the. reports ex d4 and d9 which are the reports of the incident from the side of. the accused alleging that jagdish with his party came to balbir s house. called him out and shot him and that another person belonging to jagdish group. hari gupta  shot bhajju  where and when dehati nalshi was recorded therefore. assumes relevance and significance. 8. 10   in so far as the failure to send the report to the nearest magistrate. not being sent to magistrate as required by section 157 cr pc but to sub. divisional magistrate or district magistrate  he relied on the copy of the. report dated 18 4 1984 which had been filed with a supplementary affidavit to. show that a copy was sent to the district magistrate  tikamgarh  the fact that. it was not sent to the nearest magistrate  is not however disputed. regulation 710 does not override section 157 cr pc nor does it give a choice. correctness is not even disputed in the special leave petition. 12   we are of the view that the circumstances relied on by the high court to. give benefit of doubt to the respondent  are relevant and material  taken.

[Facts] short   challenges in this appeal by special leave  the order dated 21 8 2002. passed by the andhra pradesh high court in criminal petition no 1737 of 2001. holding that the complaint signed by a power of attorney holder was not. 2   the appellant   complainant filed a complaint dated 2 4 1996 against. respondents 2 to 4 herein  namely m s speciality aqua ventures ltd  its. managing director and chairman arrayed as accused 1  2 and 3  alleging that a. cheque for rs 12 40 000   issued by the third respondent  on behalf of. respondents 2 to 4  was dishonoured  respondents 2 and 4 filed an application. seeking discharge  the said petition was dismissed by the learned magistrate. by order dated 17 12 1998  the revision filed by them against the order of the. learned magistrate was rejected by the sessions court on 12 2 2001. thereafter  the fourth respondent herein  third accused  filed a petition. under section 482 cr pc for quashing the proceedings  the fourth respondent. contended that he could not be arrayed as an accused as the cheque was issued. by the third respondent in his individual capacity. the high court allowed the said petition on a different ground  by order dated. 21 8 2002  and quashed the complaint as against the fourth respondent  it held. that the complaint was not signed by the payee  that is  the sole proprietor. of the payee concern  but was signed by his power of attorney holder and that. was not permissible. 3   the said order of the high court is challenged in this appeal by special. leave  by interim orders dated 28 11 2003 and 2 4 2004  this court 3 stayed. the operation of the order of the learned single judge and directed that the. case should be proceeded with. 4   the question that arises for our consideration is whether the complaint. under section 138 of the. act  http   www liiofindia org in legis cen num act nia1881262   signed by a. magistrate to take cognizance of an offence upon receiving a complaint of. magistrate taking cognizance of an offence on complaint  to examine upon oath. 6   in mmtc ltd  vs  medchl chemicals   pharma  p  ltd    2002  1  scc 234  a. complaint was filed by mmtc ltd  through the manager of its regional office. subsequently  the manager was substituted by dy. general manager who was duly authorized  the high court held that the 4. complaint was not maintainable as it was signed and presented by a person  who. was neither an authorized agent nor a person empowered under the articles of. association or by any resolution of the board to do so  it held that only the. executive director of mmtc ltd had the authority to institute legal. proceedings  reversing the said decision  this court held. in our view the reasoning given above cannot be sustained  section 142 of the. appellant company who is the payee of the two cheques. complaint is filed by  m s shankar finance   investments  a proprietary. concern of sri atmakuri sankara rao  represented by its power of attorney. by its proprietor atmakuri shankara rao. 3 represented by its power of attorney holder sri thamada satyanarayana. s o late adinarayana  hindu  aged 50 years  service  residing at mig b 230. sagarnagar  vuda layout  vishakhapatnam   43. 10 the said description is proper and therefore  the complaint has been duly. filed by the payee. 12   the high court has referred to the fact that the sworn statement before. the learned magistrate was of the attorney holder of the payee and not by the. 13   we  accordingly  allow this appeal  set aside the impugned order dated. 21 8 2002 and direct the learned magistrate to proceed with the complaint as. already directed by the interim order. j  r  v  raveendran. j  p  sathasivam  new delhi. june 26  2008. liiofindia      copyright policy   liiofindia copyright html         disclaimers   liiofindia disclaimers html         privacy policy   liiofindia privacy html         feedback   liiofindia feedback html.
[Ratio of the decision] attorney holder is not maintainable. such offences under the statute  then the complainant requesting the. magistrate to take cognizance of the offence must satisfy the eligibility. criterion prescribed by the statute  in the present case  the only eligibility. criteria prescribed by section 142 is that the complaint must be by the payee. or the holder in due course  this criteria is satisfied as the complaint is in. the name and on behalf of the appellant company. subsequent stage the company can send a person who is competent to represent. the company  the complaints could thus not have been quashed on this ground. 7   the payee of the cheque is m s shankar finance   investments  the. 8   as contrasted from a company incorporated under the companies act  1956. which is a legal entity distinct from its shareholders  a proprietary concern. is not a legal entity distinct from its proprietor  a proprietary concern is. nothing but an individual trading under a trade name  in civil law where an. individual carries on business in a name or style other than his own name  he. cannot sue in the trading name but must sue in his own name  though others can. sue him in the trading name  therefore  if the appellant in this case had to. file a civil suit  the proper description of plaintiff should be  atmakuri. sankara rao carrying on business under the name and style of m s shankar. finance   investments  a sole proprietary concern   but we are not dealing. with a civil suit  we are dealing with a criminal complaint to which the. special requirements of section 142 of the act apply  section 142 requires. that the complainant should be payee  the payee is m s shankar finance. investments  therefore in a criminal complaint relating to an offence under. section 138 of the act  it is permissible to lodge the complaint in the name. of the proprietary concern itself. 9   the next question is where a proprietary concern carries on business. through an attorney holder  whether the attorney holder can lodge the 7. complaint  the attorney holder is the agent of the grantor  when the grantor. authorizes the attorney holder to initiate legal proceedings and the attorney. holder accordingly initiates legal proceedings  he does so as the agent of the. grantor and the initiation is by the grantor represented by his attorney. therefore where the payee is a proprietary concern  the complaint can be filed. i  by the proprietor of the proprietary concern  describing himself as the. sole proprietor of the  payee    ii  the proprietary concern  describing. itself as a sole proprietary concern  represented by its sole proprietor  and. iii  the proprietor or the proprietary concern represented by the attorney. holder under a power of attorney executed by the sole proprietor  it follows. that in this case the complaint could have been validly filed by describing. the complainant in any one of the following four methods. atmakuri shankara rao  sole proprietor of m s  shankar finance   investments. or  m s  shankar finance   investments a sole proprietary concern represented. 11   the assumption of the high court that where the payee is a proprietary. concern  the complaint can be signed only by the proprietor of the proprietary. concern and not by a power of attorney holder of the proprietor  is not sound. it is not in dispute that in this case a power of attorney has been granted by. atmakuri shankara rao  as proprietor of m s shankar finance   investments in. favour of thamada satyanarayana and the same was produced along with the. complaint  the description of the complainant is as under. m s shankar finance and investments   a proprietary concern of sri atmakuri. sankara rao s o late sri a  b  rama murthy  hindu  aged about 65 years. having its office at flat no 3b  third floor  maharaja towers  vishakhapatnam. payee in person  according to the tenor of the order of the high court  this. was also irregular  but we find nothing irregular in such a procedure  it is. now well settled that the object of section 200 of the code in providing for. examination of the complainant and his witnesses by the court is to satisfy. itself about the existence of a prima facie case against the person accused of. the offence and to ensure that such person is not harassed by false and. complainant  there is no reason why the attorney holder cannot be examined as. the complainant  we may  in this connection  refer to the decision of this. knowledge and in respect of which the principal is entitled to be cross. examined. signed the complaint  it will be absurd to say that he should not be examined. partner of the firm or the proprietor of a concern  who did not have personal. we find no infirmity.

[Facts] 1000  8 may 2009. judgement. in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal no. 3474 of 2009  arising out of slp  civil  no 16046 of 2004 muni kumar razdan. appellant versus trimurti charitable trust  gwalior   ors      respondents. dr  arijit pasayat  j. 1   leave granted. 2   challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a division bench of the. madhya pradesh high court  gwalior bench  allowing the letters patent appeal. filed by the respondents  the appeal filed by the present respondents was. directed against the order of the leaned single judge in writ petition 789 of. 2000  preliminary objection was raised by the present appellant taking the. stand that the appeal was not maintainable as no orders have been passed. learned counsel for the present appellant submitted that the order passed by. the learned single judge is not a judgment within the meaning of clause 10 of. the letters patent. 3   the appellants in the letters patent appeal submitted that writ petition. was decided without issuing notice to the appellants before the writ court. i e  present respondents  the petition was disposed of on the first day it was. counsel for the state on advance notice. 4   it was submitted that the respondent trust was not registered at the. public trust under section 5 of the madhya public trust act  1951  in short. the  act    it is provided under section 8 that any person aggrieved by. registration of the trust may file civil suit challenging registration  it was. submitted that after registration of the trust a writ petition was filed. without issuing notice  learned single judge had issued direction holding. therein that the registrar has power to review the order of registration  it. was also submitted that the writ petitioner had filed the civil suit under. section 8 challenging the registration and in that event petition should have. been dismissed  the division bench was of the view that the basic question was. whether after registration of the trust  registrar  public trusts has. jurisdiction to revive the order of registration  after referring to various. provisions it was held that the single judge was not justified in deciding the. 5   in the present appeal  the stand was that the division bench should not. have decided the letters patent appeal  it was pointed out that the 3 division. bench should not have interfered with the concurrent finding of the single. judge particularly  when the letters patent appeal was not maintainable. 8 of the act have not been kept in view  it was submitted further that a. 7   it is to be noted that in the writ petition filed by the present. respondent no 1  it was respondent no 3  all the grievances related to the. order of registrar of public trust and sdo respondent no 2 in the file. justice requires that they should have been heard in the matter. 8   the ultimate direction given by the division bench reads as follow. having considered the matter  we would hold that the single bench has. committed an error in not issuing notice before deciding the writ petition. remanded back to a single bench for decision of the writ petition on its. merit  but considering the fact that against the order of registrar  public. trusts  a civil suit u s 8 of the act has been filed by the respondent and the. appellants have also been a civil suit for declaration of the title of trust.
[Ratio of the decision] person can invoke the writ jurisdiction when he cannot file the suit under. sub section  1  of section 8   it is submitted that since the writ petitioner. was not a party before the registrar at the time of inquiry  it is not covered. relating to the present respondent no 1  the basic requirement of natural. normally  in such case the order is to be set aside and the 4 matter should be. and injunction  it will not be appropriate to remand the matter back to the. single bench  questions of title of the respondent or competency of the. settler to create trust can be decided in the civil suits filed by the. parties  before the civil court  therefore  questions involved in this case. and objection to the registration may be raised by the parties before the. civil court where the suits are pending  it is expected that the suits shall. be decided at the earliest by the trial court say within a period of one year. from the date of communication of this order  we further order that both the. decision on merit. 9   in the aforesaid background without entering into the issue relating to. maintainability of the letters patent appeal  we feel that the. directions observations of the division bench allowing the appeal filed by the. respondents cannot be faulted  it is needless to say that the dispute in the.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. home        databases   databases html     worldlii  http   www worldlii org. search   forms search1 html     feedback   liiofindia feedback html. supreme court of india. you are here      liiofindia         databases   databases html      supreme court of india           2008            2008  insc 1032. judgement. civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal no  493 of 2003 maruti dada patil. sarvangin        appellant s  vikas sanstha versus order the appellant sought. permission was granted to the appellant to run a co education school  the. first respondent  who was already running a secondary school at nagaj. challenged the grant of such permission  the bombay high court  by its. judgment dated 19 7 2000  allowed the writ petition and set aside the order. dated 29 5 1999 with a direction to consider the appellant s application by. giving a hearing to the appellant as well as the first respondent and then. pass appropriate orders  thereafter  the third respondent heard the parties. and by order dated 20 4 2001  cancelled the permission granted to the. appellant  however  later  the state government by order dated 20 7 2001. court in w p  no 854 2002  during the pendency of the said petition  the. district level        2. 2  committee reconsidered the application and passed a resolution dated 10 7 2002 recommending the grant of permission  however  on 9 8 2002  the high court allowed the second writ petition filed by the first respondent and set aside the order dated 20 7 2001 passed by the government whereby the cancellation dated 20 4 2001 was withdrawn  the order of the high court is challenged by the appellant in this appeal by special leave  on 20 1 2003  while granting leave  this court stayed the order of the high court and permitted the appellant to run the school in accordance with the regulations. 3   the resultant position is that the appellant  who was granted permission. to run the school on 21 5 1999  has been continuously running the secondary. school for about eight years  with short periods of cancellation  when the. matter was heard today  learned counsel appearing for the state government. prejudice is caused to the first respondent by the appellant continuing its. school  by virtue of the interim order passed by this court  the school has. been running for more than five years  it is also not in dispute that the. appellant has also constructed buildings and provided infrastructure required. for the school and it has been running for quite some time  in these peculiar. circumstances  it is not necessary to examine the several technical objections. of the first respondent. 4. permit the appellant to continue the school in accordance with the. regulations  in pursuance of permission already granted. j. r v  raveendran   new delhi                             j.
[Ratio of the decision] withdrew the cancellation. 2   feeling aggrieved  the first respondent again approached the bombay high. permission and now  the demand for schools in the area has grown and in fact. the area requires more schools and the state has no objection for the. continuation of the appellant s school. 4   the objection to the continuation of the appellant s school is only by the. first respondent which is a rival school  the objection is on the ground that. there is no need            3. 3  for any new school and that a new school will lead to unhealthy competition and may also result in existing school being closed  it is also contended that the appellant had adopted illegal and irregular means for getting the permission to start the school. 5   the contention of the first respondent that there is no need for school. has lost relevance in view of the specific stand of the state government that. in fact these two schools are not sufficient and that further schools are. needed in the area  the apprehension that a new school may lead to unhealthy. competition and closure of the existing school is baseless  as competition. improves efficiency and excellence and the existence of appellant s school for. nearly eight years  has not affected the first respondent s school  no.

[Facts] been assaulted by four persons in a hotel in the night between 25th and 26th. of april  1996 and on the basis of the report given by him cr no 102 1996 was. registered at chalisgaon police station. during the investigation the appellant figured as a witness and his statement. was recorded under section 161 of the code of criminal procedure  after. investigation chalisgaon police station submitted chargesheet against 4. accused persons named in the first information report on 24 5 1997  the said. case  hereinafter referred to as the police case  is pending for trial before. complaint was filed impleading the appellant herein besides five other persons. as accused  appellant figures as accused no 6 in the complaint case and. according to the allegation he conspired with other accused in commission of a. crime  in this case  hereinafter referred to as the complaint case the. judicial magistrate took 3 cognizance of the offence and issued process by. order dated 2nd february  1998 against the four accused who were already. chargesheeted in the police case and three other accused including the. appellant herein  by an order of the bombay high court dated 26th april  1999. simultaneously  the bombay high court further directed the magistrate in sesin. of the trial to conclude the trial within stipulated time. 3   the appellant filed an application before the learned magistrate in sesin. incident in the complaint case  the learned magistrate by its order dated 5th. learned magistrate  inter alia  observing that no such blanket protection can. be given to the appellant  relevant portion of the judgment of the high court. 10   to sum up  witness balasaheb   ramesh laxman deshmukh is not an accused. in cc no. 97 96 in spite of accusations against him in the deposition of complainant. charudatta  esh 142  and admission of complainant dated 26 4 1996  exh 143. the blanket protection granted by magistrate vide his order dated 5 9 2000 can. insc 136  http   www liiofindia org in cases cen insc 1960 136 html    air. 1961 sc 29   cgi bin lawcite cit air 201961 20sc 2029   wherein it has been. held as follows. the effect of this decision thus appears to be that one of the essential. the party who is being compelled to give evidence against himself  and this. the said judgment. by the policeman for obtaining information from an accused strongly suggestive.
[Ratio of the decision] 1   the short but important question of law which falls for our determination. in the present appeal is as to whether protection under article 20 3  of the. constitution is available to the appellant  who though not an accused in the. police case in which he has been asked to depose as a witness but figures as. an accused in the complaint case filed later on in relation to the same. incident. 2. 2   bereft of unnecessary details  the facts necessary for determination of. the aforesaid question are that informant charudatta pawar is alleged to have. judicial magistrate  first class  chalisgaon  in regard to the same incident. which is the subject matter of the trial in the aforesaid police case  a. both the criminal cases i e. police case and complaint case were directed to be tried and decided. witness in the case as he himself is an accused in relation to the same. cannot examine the appellant as a witness in the police case  the state of. maharashtra 4 aggrieved by the aforesaid order filed criminal revision. which are pieces of evidence relevant in c c no 3 98  since he is not charged. by the charge framed in that case  therefore  even if he is compelled to. depose as a witness in c c  no  97 96 that can not be said to be compulsion to. give evidence against himself  moreover  by virtue of proviso to section 132. of indian evidence act  he is protected from use of self incriminating. ltd  for the conduct of the business of the said bank  and that he failed to. prove in course of his statements made under section 19 f before shri d k. guha  deputy 6 director of enforcement that the contravention took place. without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the. aforesaid contravention  as required under section 23 c of the exchange act. 5   at the first blush we were inclined to accept this submission but on a. the constitution does not extend to any kind of evidence but only to self. incriminating statements relating to the charges brought against an accused. in order to bring the testimony of an accused within the prohibition of. constitutional protection  it must be of such character that by itself it tend. to incriminate the accused  appellant is not an accused in the police case and. in fact a witness  whose statement was recorded under article 161 of the. criminal procedure code  and  therefore  not entitled to a blanket protection. however  in case of trial in the police case answer to certain question if. tends to incriminate the appellant he can seek protection at that stage. whether answer to a question is incriminating or otherwise has to be. considered at the time it is put  reference 7 in this connection can be made. to a decision of this court in the case of state of bombay vs  kathi kalu. against the accused person at least probable  considered by itself. 6   we are of the opinion that for invoking the constitutional right under. article 20 3  a formal accusation against the person claiming the protection. must exist  simply because the appellant figures as the accused in the. complaint case  a blanket protection as claimed by him cannot be granted. reference in this connection can be made to a decision of this court in the. case of raja narayanlal bansilal v  maneck phiroz mistry and another    1960. conclusion  in our opinion  is fully consistent with the two other decisions. of this court to which we have already referred. 7   referring to the decision of this court in the case of ramanlal bhogilal. within the meaning of article 20 3   the only protection that article 20 3. gives to him is that he cannot be compelled to be a witness against himself. but this does not mean that he need not give information regarding matters. which do not tend to incriminate him. beyond the complaint case but shall cover the police case also because. appellant is an accused in relation to the same incident and the trial is. pending in the said case  reliance has been placed on a decision of this court. concerned  the ban on self  accusation and the right to silence  while one. investigation or trial is under way  goes beyond that case and protects the. accused in regard to other offences pending or imminent  which may deter him. from voluntary disclosure of criminatory matter  we are disposed to read. of guilt  it becomes  compelled testimony   violative of article 20 3. we do not find any substance in this submission of the learned counsel and the. decision relied on is clearly distinguishable. 10. 9   as observed earlier the appellant is not an accused in the police case and. in fact a witness whose statement was recorded during the course of. investigation under section 161 of the code of criminal procedure  in the. police case he utmost can be asked to support the case of the prosecution but. no question intented to incriminate him can be asked and in case it is done. the protection under article 20 3  of the constitution shall spring into. action  what question shall be put to this appellant when he appears as a. witness is a matter of guess and on that basis he does not deserve the blanket. protection under article 20 3  of the constitution  even at the cost of the. repetition we may observe that in the police case when he appears and asked to. answer question  the answer whereof tends to incriminate him  he can refuse to. answer the same pleading protection under article 20 3  of the constitution. in such eventuality the court would decide the same  therefore  at this stage. the blanket protection sought by the appellant is not fit to be granted. 11. 10   as regards the authority of this court in the case of nandini satpathy. supra  the same has no bearing in the facts and circumstances of this case. there the question was as to whether the protection under article 20 3  of the. constitution shall apply at the stage of police interrogation and in answer.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. home        databases   databases html     worldlii  http   www worldlii org. search   forms search1 html     feedback   liiofindia feedback html. supreme court of india. you are here      liiofindia         databases   databases html      supreme court of india           2008            2008  insc 1024. database search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc     name. search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc title 1     recent. appellant  s  versus state of bihar   ors  respondent s  order respondents 2. to 8 were tried for offences punishable under sections 147  148  323  324. 448  379 and 302 ipc  the trial court  by its judgment dated 1 5 2000. acquitted them. 2   the appellant  who is the informant  filed criminal revision no 599 2000. before the high court  according to him  adequate steps were not taken by the. trial court to secure the attendance of the prosecution witnesses and that had. led to a wrong acquittal  the high court  by order dated 4 10 2002  rejected. the revision petition as it found that the trial court had taken all. reasonable steps for securing the attendance of the witnesses  the said order. j. r v  raveendran                        j. dr  mukundakam sharma  new delhi. june 25  2008.
[Ratio of the decision] criminal appellate jurisdiction criminal appeal no  1145 of 2003 sukhdeo jha.

[Facts] petition no  1930 of 2006 is the husband of dr. asha goel  hereinafter referred to as the  deceased   who was found murdered. said dr  sadankumar goel filed the criminal writ peition no. 1930 of 2006 with the prayer that respondents 1 to 7 in the writ petition. should be directed to take appropriate steps under section 166 a  of the code. goenka the appellant in the appeal relatable to special leave  crl   no  3206. of 2007 and pradeep parab during the investigation and of the materials. recovered from the santro car seized during investigation along with all other. materials collected in the course of investigation relevant for the purpose of. 3   stand of dr  sadankumar was that for want of proper medical and forensic. are ready to assist the investigating team in their desired area and 4 the. office of the chief coroner for ontario has performed a second autopsy of the. deceased at the family s request and they have preserved genetic material of. 4   the high court after hearing noted that the reply reflects the concern on. the part of the office of the chief coroner for ontario  the deceased was a. canadian citizen and a resident of ontario  the high court called upon the. investigating agency to file their short reply  in the reply filed it was. accepted that the facility for mitochondrial dna analysis is not available in. the forensic science laboratory either in kalina or at kolkatta and if it is. the writ petitioner s belief that carrying out such an analysis on the. material 5 seized by the police during the course of investigation would bring. to light with unerring certainty the culpability of the concerned accused  it. investigating agency  5  the court after considering the various submissions. directed the investigating agency to get the material collected in the course. of investigation examined in canada  it noted that it will take sometime and. the forensic laboratory either in kalina or kolkata  the investigating officer. made similar statement  the fsl kalina noted that the material for extraction. of dna was an old or washed clothes  the investigating officer therefore. rightly stated that carrying out such an analysis on the material seized by. the police during the course of 10 investigation would bring to light with. unerring certainty culpability of the concerned accused. inevitably have conducted further investigation with the aid of cfs under. section 173 8  of the code. matter  it appears from the statement of learned counsel for the state that. the lady who was murdered in bombay was a canadian citizen of the indian. origin  it is stated that there was a confession by accused persons on the. basis of which recoveries were made  the blood stained clothes of the accused. a1  and the deceased were seized. and the genetic material were with the canadian coroner. asok kumar ganguly  new delhi.
[Ratio of the decision] such forensic and medical examination to canada as there is no such facility. available in india. investigation  material evidence would be lost to the prosecutor and therefore. at his request office of a chief coroner of the province of ontario has. the deceased which can be used to make a genetic comparison to any samples. that the investigating agencies in india wish to have tested. will not only aid the investigation but also there cannot be any question of. objection to the helping hand offered by the writ petitioner to the. therefore the trial court would wait for such a report which will be part of. medical and forensic investigation which can be filed in the trial court under. view the parameters of section 166a of the code  it is submitted that some. evidence which is already in existence but in a country outside india can be. collected  but for that purpose 1 application is required to be made by the. prosecution before the competent court of law i e  the court which is seized. of the matter  and 2 the application shall be for collecting the evidence and. not for creating the evidence. 7  3  on such application being allowed  an appropriate request by way of. letter of authority from competent court of law to the concerned court of law. or authority where such evidence is available has to be made. 7   it is the stand of the appellants that in the instant case neither the. application has been made by the prosecution nor any letter of request had. been issued by competent court of law  though the court of session at sewree. in mumbai is seized of matter by avoiding the said court and by invoking writ. jurisdiction of the bombay high court  consent order has been obtained between. the family members of the deceased and the 8 prosecution keeping the accused. persons completely away from the proceeding though their rights are directed. affected. 8   it is submitted that by the impugned order the investigating officer has. been authorized to remove important piece of evidence from bombay  take the. same directly from the office of the chief coroner of ontario laboratory for. mitochondrial dna test  there is no letter of request from competent court to. the concerned court or authority  the laboratory in question cannot be. considered to be authority covered under article 12 of the constitution of. india  1950  in short the  constitution   and in view thereof it cannot be. said that the matter had been submitted to the authority 9 contemplated under. the provisions of law  it is submitted that the required test can be conducted. at kolkata. 9   the stand of the respondent no 2 is that the attempt of the accused person. is to avoid detention of materials which would show the involvement of the. accused persons  the state government in its affidavit before the high court. has accepted that the facility of mitochondrial dna test is not available in. 10   it is well settled that the accused has no right to be heard at the stage. of investigation  the prosecution will however have to prove its case at the. accused can certainly avail himself of an opportunity to cross examine and or. otherwise controvert the authenticity  admissibility or legal significance of. before the high court  it is apparent that the investigating authorities would. 11   we are of the view that what is the evidentiary value can be tested. during trial  at this juncture it would not be proper to interfere in the 12. 12   it is pointed out as noted above that the canadian citizen was murdered. and therefore the candian police was involved  dead body was taken to canada. matter we are not inclined to interfere and it is for the court to decide.

[Facts] liiofindia   images logos liiofindia small png. home        databases   databases html     worldlii  http   www worldlii org. search   forms search1 html     feedback   liiofindia feedback html. supreme court of india. you are here      liiofindia         databases   databases html      supreme court of india           2008            2008  insc 1030. database search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc     name. search   form search1 html mask in cases cen insc title 1     recent. judgement. in the supreme court of india civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal nos. 4625 4626 of 2005 indian institute of technology        appellant s  versus. order the respondents joined the services of the appellant indian institute of. technology   the institute   for short  as junior senior research assistants. academic cadre   junior senior technical assistants  technical cadre  and. research scholars  as they were stagnating for long without promotional. opportunities  the institute promoted them to supernumerary posts of. laboratory superintendents with pay scales equivalent to that of lecturers  as. the laboratory superintendents were not extended the benefits that were. extended to academic staff  the respondents filed wp no 1757 of 1988 seeking a. direction to the institute to classify them as academic staff. 2   during the pendency of the said petition  the age of superannuation of. employees of the institute which was originally 60 years  was increased as 62. years 2 in respect of academic staff  scientific design staff and others. personnel of registry  registrar  deputy registrar and assistant registrar. library  librarian  deputy librarian  assistant librarian  and physical. education  group  a   who were on the roll of the institute as on 31 8 1998. vide resolution of board of governors dated 15 6 1999  pursuant to government. of india s directive dated 31 8 1998  as the laboratory superintendents were. not being categorized either as academic staff or as personnel of registry. increased age of superannuation  therefore  they filed another writ petition. no 922 of 2000  seeking a declaration that they are entitled to the benefit of. the enhanced age of superannuation  62 years  as per the government of india s. directive dated 31 8 1998 and subsequent clarifications. alternatively  they sought quashing of the said directive dated 31 8 1998 and. the consequential resolution of the institute dated 15 6 1999  if they were to. be construed as ignoring the laboratory superintendents as a class from. coverage. 3   the high court disposed of the said two writ petitions by a common order. dated 7 7 2004  it held that on account of passage of time  the issues raised. in wp no 1757 of 1988 had become academic and consequently disposed of the. said writ petition  as no relief was required to be granted to the writ. petitioners in that petition  in so far as wp no 922 of 2000  the high court. declared that the respondents are eligible for the increased age of. superannuation of 62 years as per the government of india s directive dated. 31 8 1998 and subsequent clarifications. the high court also issued a direction to the institute to implement the said. goi directive dated 31 8 1998 and its clarifications and apply to the. respondents  the 3 increased age of superannuation of 62 years  a further. direction was issued to the government of india to release necessary grants to. the institute to enable the institute to pay the arrears of salary and other. consequential benefits to the respondents herein within four months  a. direction was issued to the institute to pay the respondents  on release of. grant by the government of india  within four weeks of such release  the court. further directed that if the respondents were entitled to be reinstated as a. consequence the institute should either reinstate them or give the monetary. benefits upto the age of superannuation. 4   the said order of the high court is challenged by the institute  the. institute contends that classification of posts is the function of the board. of governors of the institute under statute 11 of the institute with reference. to the functions or duties discharged by the holders of such posts  and the. academic staff   b  technical staff   c  administrative and other staff. statute 11 also enumerates the several posts which fall under the said three. categories  the said statute also contemplates the board classifying any other.
[Ratio of the decision] help   liiofindia help cases html. indian institute of technology v  m s bidarkundi and ors   2008  insc 1030. 2 july 2008. library or physical education  they were not extended the benefit of the. the benefit to all the employees at the same point of time and it is possible. for the employer to make dissimilar provision with regard to different groups. of employees and that would not amount to discrimination  reliance is placed. posts as either academic  technical or administrative posts  by appropriate. resolution  in these cases  the posts in which the respondents were earlier. employed fell either under the category of academic staff  that is  the posts. superintendents as either academic  technical or administrative  as required. by statute no 11  as they are supernumerary posts  in the absence of. classification of laboratory superintendents by the institute under any of the. specified categories  and as the said posts are considered as supernumerary. posts  the classification which applied to them prior to their promotion will. be classified as technical staff  until the board of governors of the. institute assigns a classification to the post of laboratory superintendent. we are therefore of the view that until the post of laboratory superintendent. is classified  the respondents should be treated as continuing to belong to. the category to which they belonged before promotion to the supernumerary post. of laboratory superintendent  we are also of the view  to avoid confusion and. uncertainty  the board of governors of the institute should classify the post. of laboratory superintendent under statute no 11  by taking note of relevant. factors including the duties discharged by them. 7   we therefore allow these appeals and issue the following directions in. place of the directions issued by the high court. a  such of those respondents  who were academic staff before their promotion. as laboratory superintendents shall be considered as academic staff for the.


